EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for
Memory Disaggregation
Weigao Su

Vishal Shrivastav

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Abstract

Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707221

Achieving low remote memory access latency remains the
primary challenge in realizing memory disaggregation over
Ethernet within the datacenters. We present EDM that attempts to overcome this challenge using two key ideas. First,
while existing network protocols for remote memory access
over the Ethernet, such as TCP/IP and RDMA, are implemented on top of the MAC layer, EDM takes a radical approach by implementing the entire network protocol stack
for remote memory access within the Physical layer (PHY) of
the Ethernet. This overcomes fundamental latency and bandwidth overheads imposed by the MAC layer, especially for
small memory messages. Second, EDM implements a centralized, fast, in-network scheduler for memory traffic within the
PHY of the Ethernet switch. Inspired by the classic Parallel Iterative Matching (PIM) algorithm, the scheduler dynamically
reserves bandwidth between compute and memory nodes by
creating virtual circuits in the PHY, thus eliminating queuing
delay and layer 2 packet processing delay at the switch for
memory traffic, while maintaining high bandwidth utilization. Our FPGA testbed demonstrates that EDM’s network
fabric incurs a latency of only ∼300 ns for remote memory access in an unloaded network, which is an order of magnitude
lower than state-of-the-art Ethernet-based solutions such as
RoCEv2 and comparable to emerging PCIe-based solutions
such as CXL. Larger-scale network simulations indicate that
even at high network loads, EDM’s average latency remains
within 1.3× its unloaded latency.

1

Introduction

Memory disaggregation is a computing architecture in which
compute and memory are physically separate nodes of resources connected via a network fabric such as the Ethernet. Memory disaggregation promises high compute density,
fine-grained memory pooling and provisioning, and elastic
memory scaling. Hence, it is not surprising that memory disaggregation has attracted significant interest in recent years,
both in industry [71, 80] and in academia [22, 38, 56, 61].
As the bandwidth of the Ethernet link within the datacenters has reached 100–400 Gbps, with Tbps Ethernet on the
horizon [76], prior works [22, 38] have shown that the current Ethernet bandwidth within the datacenters is more than
sufficient to carry both the memory and traditional IP and
storage traffic with minimal bandwidth contention. However,
despite the promise of abundant bandwidth, remote memory
access latency remains the key bottleneck in the realization of memory disaggregation over Ethernet. As a result,
there have been several proposals for alternative fabrics for
memory disaggregation within the datacenters [49, 67, 79],
most recently the PCIe-based CXL fabric [79], which promise
ultra-low latency for remote memory access. However, such
fabrics scale poorly in terms of bandwidth, distance, cost, and
power compared to Ethernet (§2.2). Furthermore, even their
latency scales poorly with network load (§4.3) due to ineffective mechanisms to handle fabric congestion [92]. Hence,
an ultra-low latency Ethernet fabric, if realized in practice,
has the potential to enable scalable, high bandwidth, and low
latency memory disaggregation at low cost and power.
Using Ethernet as the interconnect between the processor and the memory introduces two sources of latency for
memory access (Figure 1)—(i) the processor/memory to NIC
interconnect latency, and (ii) the Ethernet fabric latency,
which includes the latency of the host network protocol
stack for remote memory access over Ethernet (e.g. TCP/IP,
RDMA) and the latency of the Ethernet switching network.
Using the traditional PCIe interconnect between the NIC
and the processor/memory would add a latency of the order
of few 𝜇s [48], which is an order of magnitude higher than
intra-server memory access latency. Fortunately, in recent
years, various new interconnect specifications have been
proposed that replace PCIe or build on the physical layer of

CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing; • Networks → Network protocol design; In-network processing.
Keywords: Memory Disaggregation; In-Network Scheduler;
Ethernet PHY.
ACM Reference Format:
Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav. 2025. EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707221

377

