EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for
Memory Disaggregation
Weigao Su

Vishal Shrivastav

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Abstract

Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707221

Achieving low remote memory access latency remains the
primary challenge in realizing memory disaggregation over
Ethernet within the datacenters. We present EDM that attempts to overcome this challenge using two key ideas. First,
while existing network protocols for remote memory access
over the Ethernet, such as TCP/IP and RDMA, are implemented on top of the MAC layer, EDM takes a radical approach by implementing the entire network protocol stack
for remote memory access within the Physical layer (PHY) of
the Ethernet. This overcomes fundamental latency and bandwidth overheads imposed by the MAC layer, especially for
small memory messages. Second, EDM implements a centralized, fast, in-network scheduler for memory traffic within the
PHY of the Ethernet switch. Inspired by the classic Parallel Iterative Matching (PIM) algorithm, the scheduler dynamically
reserves bandwidth between compute and memory nodes by
creating virtual circuits in the PHY, thus eliminating queuing
delay and layer 2 packet processing delay at the switch for
memory traffic, while maintaining high bandwidth utilization. Our FPGA testbed demonstrates that EDM’s network
fabric incurs a latency of only ∼300 ns for remote memory access in an unloaded network, which is an order of magnitude
lower than state-of-the-art Ethernet-based solutions such as
RoCEv2 and comparable to emerging PCIe-based solutions
such as CXL. Larger-scale network simulations indicate that
even at high network loads, EDM’s average latency remains
within 1.3× its unloaded latency.

1

Introduction

Memory disaggregation is a computing architecture in which
compute and memory are physically separate nodes of resources connected via a network fabric such as the Ethernet. Memory disaggregation promises high compute density,
fine-grained memory pooling and provisioning, and elastic
memory scaling. Hence, it is not surprising that memory disaggregation has attracted significant interest in recent years,
both in industry [71, 80] and in academia [22, 38, 56, 61].
As the bandwidth of the Ethernet link within the datacenters has reached 100–400 Gbps, with Tbps Ethernet on the
horizon [76], prior works [22, 38] have shown that the current Ethernet bandwidth within the datacenters is more than
sufficient to carry both the memory and traditional IP and
storage traffic with minimal bandwidth contention. However,
despite the promise of abundant bandwidth, remote memory
access latency remains the key bottleneck in the realization of memory disaggregation over Ethernet. As a result,
there have been several proposals for alternative fabrics for
memory disaggregation within the datacenters [49, 67, 79],
most recently the PCIe-based CXL fabric [79], which promise
ultra-low latency for remote memory access. However, such
fabrics scale poorly in terms of bandwidth, distance, cost, and
power compared to Ethernet (§2.2). Furthermore, even their
latency scales poorly with network load (§4.3) due to ineffective mechanisms to handle fabric congestion [92]. Hence,
an ultra-low latency Ethernet fabric, if realized in practice,
has the potential to enable scalable, high bandwidth, and low
latency memory disaggregation at low cost and power.
Using Ethernet as the interconnect between the processor and the memory introduces two sources of latency for
memory access (Figure 1)—(i) the processor/memory to NIC
interconnect latency, and (ii) the Ethernet fabric latency,
which includes the latency of the host network protocol
stack for remote memory access over Ethernet (e.g. TCP/IP,
RDMA) and the latency of the Ethernet switching network.
Using the traditional PCIe interconnect between the NIC
and the processor/memory would add a latency of the order
of few 𝜇s [48], which is an order of magnitude higher than
intra-server memory access latency. Fortunately, in recent
years, various new interconnect specifications have been
proposed that replace PCIe or build on the physical layer of

CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing; • Networks → Network protocol design; In-network processing.
Keywords: Memory Disaggregation; In-Network Scheduler;
Ethernet PHY.
ACM Reference Format:
Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav. 2025. EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707221

377

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Processor

Intra-server Processor to Memory
Interconnect

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

memory nodes are connected using a single Ethernet switch.
To achieve ultra-low latency with high bandwidth utilization,
EDM uses two key design ideas, as discussed below.
First, we note that existing Ethernet-based network protocol stacks for remote memory access, such as TCP/IP and
RDMA, are implemented on top of Ethernet’s Media Access
Control (MAC) layer. Unfortunately, the MAC layer imposes
fundamental latency and bandwidth overheads for small
memory messages due to its operation at frame granularity. In particular, the MAC layer imposes a minimum frame
size of 64 B and an inter-frame gap (IFG) of at least 12 bytes.
This results in high bandwidth overhead for small memory
messages, such as a remote memory read request that only
contains the control information for reading from remote
memory, e.g., a 64-bit (8 B) remote memory address (§2.4).
Further, MAC layer does not allow intra-frame preemption.
As a result, a small, latency-sensitive memory message cannot preempt the transmission of a large Ethernet frame carrying IP or storage data, thus significantly increasing the
latency of small memory messages (§2.4).
To overcome these challenges, EDM employs a rather radical approach of completely bypassing the MAC layer for
remote memory access and implementing the entire network
protocol stack for remote memory access inside the Physical
Coding Sublayer (PCS) of Ethernet’s Physical Layer (PHY),
at both the host (§3.2.1) and the switch (§3.2.2). Note that
EDM does not replace the standard Ethernet network stack,
which can still be used to carry IP and storage traffic, but
rather runs in parallel with it. The key insight EDM uses is
that in the 10/25/40/100+ GbE standard, PCS operates at the
granularity of 66-bit blocks. This can be leveraged to both
reduce the bandwidth overhead for small memory messages
as well as enable fine-grained multiplexing of memory messages and non-memory Ethernet frames for lower latency for
memory messages. In addition, IFG is also accessible inside
PCS, which can be repurposed to carry memory messages,
thus further improving bandwidth utilization. On the TX
side, EDM transmits the memory messages using custom
66-bit PHY block types, and on the RX side, EDM extracts
the memory messages from the received PHY blocks and
replaces them with standard Ethernet PHY block types before sending them to the higher layers. Furthermore, EDM is
the first system to enable intra-frame preemption (§3.2.3), by
multiplexing the transmission of memory messages and nonmemory Ethernet frames at the granularity of 66-bit PHY
blocks to achieve low latency for small memory messages.
The second key idea in EDM is to implement a centralized
memory traffic scheduler in the PHY of the Ethernet switch
(§3.1.1). The scheduler takes as input the current memory
traffic demand matrix and implements the classic Parallel Iterative Matching (PIM) [6] to dynamically reserve bandwidth
between compute and memory nodes by creating virtual circuits in the PHY of the switch. This proactively ensures no
queuing and layer 2 packet processing delay at the switch

DRAM
Memory Controller

V.S.
Compute
Node

Ethernet as Processor to
Memory Interconnect

Processor

Memory Node
DRAM
Memory Controller
Memory to NIC
Interconnect

Processor to NIC
Interconnect

NIC

NIC
Network Protocol Stack
for Remote Memory
Access (e.g., RDMA)
Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY

Ethernet
Link

Ethernet Switch
Layer 2 Packet
Forwarding Pipeline

Network Protocol Stack
for Remote Memory
Access (e.g., RDMA)

Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY

Ethernet Fabric (focus of this paper)

Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY

Ethernet
Link

Figure 1. Memory disaggregation over Ethernet.
PCIe, which dramatically reduce the interconnect latency
to the NIC [73, 75, 78, 79, 86]. The demand for lower latency for cloud services has also prompted tighter integration
of the processor and memory with the network controller,
which promises to reduce the processor/memory to NIC latency to sub-100 ns. Such designs exist both in academia (e.g.,
nanoPU [30], soNUMA [49], FAME-1 RISC-V RocketChip
SoC [32]) and industry (e.g., Intel UPI [83]). Further, cloud
providers are increasingly offloading processing from CPUs
to accelerators, such as FPGAs, for cost efficiency and higher
performance [8, 21, 52]. Such accelerators [81, 82, 88] have
processor, memory, and network controller integrated on
the same motherboard, thus reducing the processor/memory
to NIC latency to as few as 10s of nanoseconds (§4.1).
In light of the above (and ongoing [55]) architectural and
system optimizations to reduce the processor/memory to
NIC latency, the Ethernet fabric becomes the primary source
of latency for remote memory access. Intra-server memory
access latency typically varies from a few 10s to a few 100s
of nanoseconds [29, 33], depending on factors such as the
memory access pattern and the location of the memory relative to the processor. However, in existing Ethernet-based
networks, even with just a single Ethernet switch and highly
optimized host network protocol stacks for remote memory
access (e.g., RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCEv2) [69]),
the Ethernet fabric latency can be as high as a few 𝜇s [22]
in an unloaded network, which is already an order of magnitude higher than the intra-server memory access latency.
And at higher network loads, the fabric latency may easily
be several orders of magnitude higher than the unloaded
latency due to network queuing and congestion [61].
Given this, we present EDM (Ethernet Disaggregated
Memory), which is an ultra-low latency Ethernet fabric for
memory disaggregation. Similarly to previous works [22, 38],
EDM targets rack- or cluster-scale memory disaggregation
within the datacenters, where hundreds of compute and

378

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

2

for memory traffic, while guaranteeing high bandwidth utilization. Furthermore, to achieve near-optimal latency under
bandwidth contention, EDM augments PIM with prioritybased scheduling, such as SRPT [70] scheduling policy.
Implementing EDM’s scheduler in practice requires overcoming two key challenges. The first challenge is to acquire
the traffic demand matrix for memory traffic accurately and
with low overhead. For this, EDM leverages the unique
request-reply nature of remote memory reads, where the
read request, containing the number of bytes to be read as
required by the memory controller interface, e.g., DDR4,
implicitly provides a perfectly accurate demand estimate
for the corresponding read reply message. Furthermore, by
implementing the scheduler on the switch, EDM is able to
intercept the read request messages and extract the read
demands inline without any bandwidth or latency overhead.
In contrast, for remote writes, which are one-sided, EDM
does incur the bandwidth and latency overhead of sending
explicit demand messages to the switch before sending the
actual write message. However, EDM manages to keep the
bandwidth overhead low using techniques such as batching,
and the latency overhead of RTT/2 is nominal at rack- or
cluster-scale. The second challenge is to design a scheduler
that can schedule at line rate with small scheduling latency.
Naïvely, each iteration of the priority-based PIM would take
𝑂 (𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛)) clock cycles to choose the highest priority matching request from a set of 𝑛 requests for each source port
in parallel. In contrast, EDM completes each iteration in a
constant number of clock cycles, owing to EDM’s novel hardware design (§3.1.2), which intelligently trades off hardware
resources for time, by using a combination of a constanttime ordered list data structure, that allows for parallel reads,
comparisons, and writes, and a fast priority encoder.
We implement EDM’s design on FPGAs by extending the
PHY of standard 25 Gb Ethernet (§4.1). Using a small network
hardware testbed of EDM-capable FPGA-based switch and
NICs, we show that EDM only incurs a latency of ∼300 ns
in an unloaded network, for both the remote memory reads
and writes (§4.2). The read (write) latency is 3.7× (1.9×), 6.8×
(3.4×), and 12.7× (6.4×) lower than the latency of raw Ethernet (standard Ethernet MAC + PHY only), RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCEv2), and hardware offloaded TCP/IP
network stacks, respectively. Furthermore, EDM’s unloaded
latency is comparable to both an intra-server two hop NUMA
[33] and an unloaded PCIe-based CXL fabric with a single
switch hop [41]. Using larger-scale software network simulations in C, we show that even at high network loads, EDM’s
average latency is within 1.3× its unloaded latency. Further,
using a wide variety of disaggregated network traffic traces
obtained from real applications in a loaded network, we show
that average message completion time for memory messages
in EDM is within 1.2–1.4× the ideal, and up to 8× lower than
CXL (§4.3), whose underlying flow control fails to handle
fabric congestion effectively at higher network loads [92].

Background and Motivation

This section details the background and motivation for EDM.
2.1 Disaggregation Model
EDM assumes the same disaggregation model as used in
previous works [22, 38], where separate nodes of resources
(compute, memory, storage nodes) are connected via a network fabric. EDM targets rack- or cluster-scale with 100s
of nodes connected using a single Ethernet switch. State-ofthe-art Ethernet switches with 51.2 Tbps [74] aggregate capacity could connect up to 512 nodes at 100 Gbps link speed.
Further, as explained in §1, EDM assumes a low latency processor/memory to NIC interconnect at each compute and
memory node, thus making the Ethernet fabric, that includes
the host network protocol stack for remote memory access
and the Ethernet switching network, as the primary source
of latency for remote memory access.
2.2 Ethernet vs. Other Disaggregation Fabrics
This paper focuses on memory disaggregation over Ethernet.
Two alternate fabrics used in practice for memory disaggregation are Infiniband [67] and the emerging PCIe-based
CXL fabric [79]. However, Ethernet-based memory disaggregation has several fundamental advantages over these
alternative solutions, especially in the context of disaggregation within datacenters. (i) Cost and management. Ethernet is the default network fabric for traditional datacenter
traffic (e.g., IP, storage). Thus, having a separate fabric for
memory traffic would result in higher infrastructure and
management cost. This is in part the reason why Infiniband
has remained limited to the HPC environment. And while
CXL is still in its infancy, its cost effectiveness with regard
to supporting memory disaggregation within datacenters
is already being questioned [40]. (ii) Bandwidth scaling.
The bandwidth of a CXL switch scales poorly compared
to an Ethernet switch, partly due to the limitations of PCIe
SerDes, which has much more stringent bit error rate requirements and lower bandwidth per unit of chip area compared
to Ethernet SerDes [84]. E.g., state-of-the-art CXL switch
supports 16 Tbps aggregate bandwidth [41, 87] in contrast to
51.2 Tbps Ethernet switch [74]. There have also been proposals [79] to use multi-switch CXL fabric for bandwidth scaling,
but each switching hop adds around 100 ns of additional latency [41] while also making it more challenging to handle
fabric congestion. (iii) Distance scaling. CXL-based systems also scale poorly with distance, requiring retimers every
500 mm [41] to preserve signal integrity. In contrast, (optical) Ethernet links can easily scale to several meters, if not
more. (iv) Fabric congestion. Both Infiniband and CXL use
link level, credit-based flow control to avoid buffer overflow
inside the switches. However, due to lack of co-ordination,
they are prone to queuing and bandwidth under-utilization,
resulting in higher latency and completion time for memory
messages [92]. We evaluate this in §4.3.

379

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

2.3 Memory Traffic in EDM
EDM abstracts remote memory traffic as either a remote
memory request message (generated on a compute node) or a
response message (generated by a remote memory controller).
EDM has four remote memory request and response message
types as described below.
1. Read request (RREQ). A remote memory read request
message generated on a compute node, containing the
remote memory address and number of bytes to be read.
2. Write request (WREQ). A remote memory write request
message generated on a compute node, containing the
remote memory address, number of bytes to be written
and the data to be written.
3. Read-Modify-Write request (RMWREQ). An atomic
read-modify-write request message for a remote memory location, generated on a compute node. The message
contains the remote memory address, an opcode for the
modify operation, and arguments for the opcode. EDM
implements atomic read-modify-write operations on the
NIC at the memory node (§3.2.1), and applications at the
compute node could choose one of those operations using
the opcode field in the RMWREQ message.
4. Read response (RRES). A message generated by a memory node in response to an RREQ or RMWREQ. For RREQ,
the response contains the bytes read from the memory
address specified in RREQ. For RMWREQ, the response
contains the result of the read-modify-write operation.
A key characteristic of memory traffic that distinguishes
it from traditional datacenter network traffic is extremely
small message sizes; at times even smaller than a minimumsized Ethernet frame (64 B). In particular, RREQ are inherently small, as they only contain the control information
for reading from remote memory, e.g., a 64-bit (8 B) remote
memory address. Similarly, RMWREQ and the corresponding RRES are also inherently small. For example, a popular
RMWREQ, namely compare-and-swap [66], contains three
64-bit arguments (24 B), and its corresponding RRES can be
as small as 1 bit True or False. Further, given that a DRAM is
byte-addressable with typical word size of 64 bits (in DDR4),
even a WREQ and an RRES (in response to an RREQ) can be
extremely small, e.g., reading/writing a pointer value (64 bits
or 8 B). As we discuss in the next section, presence of such
small messages makes it extremely challenging for existing
Ethernet fabrics to provide low latency with high bandwidth
utilization for memory traffic.

protocol stacks for remote memory access, such as TCP/IP
and RDMA (RoCEv2 [69]), are implemented (Figure 2).
• Limitation 1: Minimum frame size overhead.
Ethernet MAC imposes a minimum frame size of 64 B.
This may result in extremely poor bandwidth utilization
for small memory messages, that may be much smaller
than 64 B (§2.3). For example, an 88% bandwidth wastage
while sending 8 B RREQ messages using minimum-sized
Ethernet frames. Batching multiple memory messages destined to the same destination into a single frame may
improve utilization, but at the cost of higher latency due
to unpredictable wait time to form a batch.
• Limitation 2: Inter-frame gap (IFG) overhead.
IEEE 802.3ae standard for Ethernet enforces a minimum
gap of 96 bits between two consecutive MAC layer frames.
This results in significant bandwidth overhead for small
frames—16% overhead for 64 B frames. For traditional datacenter traffic, this overhead is masked by sending larger
frames, but for small memory messages, larger frames
would demand higher degree of batching to maintain high
bandwidth utilization, resulting in higher batching latency.
• Limitation 3: No intra-frame preemption.
In a datacenter setting, memory traffic has to co-exist
with non-memory traffic, such as IP and storage. Unfortunately, at the MAC layer, one cannot preempt an Ethernet
frame midway through its transmission. Failure to preempt a 1500 B non-memory MTU frame would increase
the latency for a remote memory message by 120 ns over a
100 Gbps link (resp. by 720 ns for a 9 KB jumbo frame). To
make matters worse, this interference may happen at each
hop, further adding to the remote memory access latency.
• Limitation 4: Layer 2 switching overhead.
An Ethernet switch performs layer 2 packet processing
to forward frames to their respective destinations. For
this, the frame has to go through a switch forwarding
pipeline [10] comprising a parser, one or more stages
of match-action tables, and a packet buffer manager and
scheduler. The total latency of such a pipeline can be several 100s of nanoseconds for modern switches (Table 1).
Next, we consider a loaded network where frames may get
queued and even dropped due to congestion at the switch.
• Limitation 5: Transport layer overhead.
Ethernet relies on a higher-layer transport protocol, e.g.,
TCP, to provide reliability and handle network congestion.
Transport protocols add significant latency to a frame’s
data path (Table 1), which can be prohibitively high for
remote memory access. RDMA over Ethernet eliminates
some of the reliability overheads by relying on a link level
priority flow control (PFC) [89] that guarantees no losses
at the switches. However, most practical deployments of
RDMA still require a congestion control protocol to avoid
bandwidth under-utilization caused by PFC [46, 95].

2.4 Limitations of Existing Ethernet Fabrics
In this section, we discuss the limitations of existing Ethernet
fabrics with regard to memory disaggregation.
First, we consider an unloaded network (i.e., no network
queuing and congestion). Here, the limitations stem primarily from the communication semantics of Ethernet’s MAC
layer, on top of which all existing Ethernet-based network

380

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

Processor

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

the inter-frame gap (IFG) bits, which one could repurpose
to carry memory messages, thus eliminating the bandwidth
overhead of IFG; and (iii) Operating at 66-bit granularity
inside the PCS also enables preemption of MAC layer Ethernet frames, thus reducing the impact of large non-memory
frames on the latency of small memory messages.

Mem Controller

TCP/IP or RDMA

L2 Forwarding

TCP/IP or RDMA

Ethernet MAC

Ethernet MAC

Ethernet MAC

Ethernet PHY

Ethernet PHY

Ethernet PHY

Compute Node

Central Scheduler

Memory Node

D2 Centralized in-network memory traffic scheduler.
This overcomes the limitations 4–6 mentioned in §2.4. First,
a central scheduler has a global view of all active memory
traffic and hence can optimally schedule the traffic such
that there is zero queuing at the switch while ensuring high
bandwidth utilization (overcoming limitation 6). Furthermore, with no queuing and congestion in the network, the
transport layer at the hosts does not need to implement
complex reliability, flow and congestion control protocols
(overcoming limitation 5). Finally, a central scheduler avoids
contention by creating virtual circuits between sources and
destinations. EDM implements the scheduler in the PHY of
the switch. Thus, memory traffic is forwarded through the
virtual circuits in the PHY, avoiding layer 2 packet processing
overhead on the switch (overcoming limitation 4).

Ethernet Switch
data path for memory traﬃc in existing Ethernet network
data path for memory traﬃc in EDM
data path for non-memory traﬃc in EDM

Figure 2. Data path for memory traffic in EDM vs. in existing
Ethernet fabrics for memory disaggregation.
• Limitation 6: Queuing delay and drops at the switch.
Most datacenter congestion control protocols are reactive
in nature [1–3, 31, 42], i.e., they rely on some form of
congestion feedback to handle congestion. Thus they cannot eliminate queuing, especially for many-to-one (incast)
traffic pattern. Memory traffic is extremely sensitive to
queuing, where even a few microseconds of queuing delay
is prohibitively high. To make matters worse, small memory messages may fit within a single frame, and hence
their loss (e.g., due to excessive queuing) would not trigger
a fast retransmission via 3 Duplicate ACKs [31]. Instead,
timeout (typically set to several 𝜇s [1, 3, 28]) would be the
only recourse. The lossless nature of PFC may eliminate
the overhead of retransmission, but it does not eliminate
queuing delay as PFC is only triggered once the queue
at a switch fills up beyond a threshold. Another class of
congestion control protocols, namely proactive congestion
control protocols (§3.1), try to proactively avoid queuing
in the network. Such protocols can either be centralized or
de-centralized. Unfortunately, de-centralized protocols are
either prone to bandwidth under-utilization [12, 16, 23, 28,
47] or suffer from poor latency scaling [7, 44, 61], while
the centralized protocols [20, 51] are bottlenecked by the
central server’s processing and bandwidth capacity.

3

In the following sections, we describe the above two design
ideas in more detail.
3.1

In-Network Scheduler

Context. EDM’s scheduler falls within the class of proactive
network traffic schedulers that try to proactively avoid queuing and congestion in the network. The core idea behind all
existing proactive network schedulers is to form an online
maximal matching [11] between sources and destinations
(for high bandwidth utilization) over disjoint network paths
(to avoid contention and queuing). The scheduler could either be centralized or de-centralized.
Receiver-driven protocols [12, 16, 23, 28, 47] are examples
of de-centralized proactive schedulers, where receivers carefully schedule data from the senders to proactively avoid
queuing at the network edge. However, due to their decentralized nature, these protocols are prone to scheduling
conflicts where a sender might receive simultaneous scheduling requests from multiple receivers but could only respond
to one, while ignoring or delaying the rest. This could lead
to bandwidth under-utilization and a long flow completion
time (§4). Another class of de-centralized proactive schedulers, used primarily in reconfigurable circuit-switched networks [7, 43, 44, 61], use a static pre-defined set of repeating
matchings for scheduling. Unfortunately, such designs have
extremely poor latency scaling w.r.t. number of nodes [5, 61].
Centralized schedulers use the knowledge of the global
network traffic demand to overcome the limitations of decentralized solutions, at the cost of scalability. These schedulers typically target rack- or cluster-scale deployments, similar to EDM. Existing centralized schedulers are implemented
in software on a remote server [20, 51] or in hardware on

Design

This section describes the design of EDM. Figure 2 shows
the architecture of EDM and contrasts it with existing Ethernet fabrics for memory disaggregation. EDM overcomes the
limitations of existing Ethernet fabrics, as discussed in §2.4,
using two key design ideas:
D1 Remote memory access protocol in the PHY. EDM
implements the network protocol stack for remote memory
access in the Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS) of Ethernet’s
Physical (PHY) layer. This overcomes the limitations 1–3
mentioned in §2.4 as follows: (i) PCS operates at a much finer
data granularity of 66-bit blocks compared to the 64 B minimum frame size at the MAC layer. This avoids bandwidth
wastage for small memory messages; (ii) PCS has access to

381

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

a layer 2 programmable switch [35]. Unfortunately, serverbased software solutions take tens of 𝜇s to make scheduling
decisions [51], thus incurring high latency overhead. Furthermore, the remote server architecture does not scale to
clusters with high aggregate bandwidth or to workloads with
a large number of small messages (such as memory traffic),
as the server bandwidth is easily overwhelmed by the control messages carrying the traffic demand (§4). On the other
hand, programmable switch-based solutions could only implement an approximate matching due to the computational
limitations of a programmable switch [35], not to mention
the added latency due to layer 2 packet processing (§2.4).
Our contribution. EDM presents a new design point in
the space of proactive centralized network schedulers, by
proposing a custom hardware pipeline for the scheduler in
the PHY of an Ethernet switch. As discussed in the following, this design overcomes both the latency and bandwidth
limitations of server-based centralized schedulers, and the
computational constraints and layer 2 packet processing
overheads of programmable switch-based schedulers.

on the opcode. Note that the advanced knowledge of message or flow size is challenging for traditional datacenter
traffic, but it is readily available for memory traffic, as a
memory access request message must include the number
of bytes to be read or written, since it is required by the
memory controller interface, such as DDR4.
• Grant. The grant mechanism implements a priority-based
online maximal matching. A grant from the switch allows
the sender to send a maximum of 𝑐 bytes (called a chunk)
from a given message over the network. Given a set of
messages in the notification queue, a priority value for
each message, and a maximum chunk size of 𝑐 bytes, the
scheduler issues grants as follows:
(1) Scheduler maintains the count of remaining bytes for
each message. Initially this value is set to the message
size as communicated in the notification message.
(2) A message with source port 𝑠 and destination port 𝑑
is marked as ineligible for scheduling if either 𝑠 or 𝑑
is marked busy. Initially all ports are marked not_busy,
thus making all messages eligible for scheduling.
(3) Scheduler selects an eligible message 𝑚 with the highest priority from the notification queue.
(4) Assuming 𝑠 and 𝑑 are respectively the source and destination ports for message 𝑚, scheduler sends a grant
message to 𝑠 asking to send a chunk of 𝑙 bytes = min(𝑐,
remaining bytes in 𝑚) from message 𝑚. It decrements
the count of remaining bytes for message 𝑚 by 𝑙 bytes.
If remaining bytes becomes 0, it removes message 𝑚
from the notification queue. Note that if 𝑚 corresponds
to an RRES message, then the first grant message for
𝑚 will be the corresponding RREQ message (that was
buffered in the notification queue).
(5) Scheduler marks 𝑠 and 𝑑 as busy, thus making messages
with source 𝑠 or destination 𝑑 ineligible for scheduling.
(6) Scheduler keeps repeating steps (3)—(5) forever.
(7) Asynchronously, after receiving the 𝑙 bytes from a message, scheduler marks the corresponding source and
destination as not_busy, thus making some of the previously ineligible messages eligible for scheduling. However, waiting till all the 𝑙 bytes have been received
before marking the source and destination as not_busy
would result in bandwidth under-utilization. This is
due to non-zero propagation delay for grant messages.
Ideally, we want to send the grant for the next chunk at
time 𝑡 such that the first bit of the next chunk arrives
at the switch right after the last bit of previous chunk
has been received. Assuming one-hop propagation delay of 𝑃, link bandwidth of 𝐵, and transmission delay
of grant message as 𝑇 , the first bit of the next chunk
will arrive at the switch at time 𝑡 + 𝑇 + 2𝑃. Whereas,
the last bit of the previous chunk will arrive at time
𝑡 ′ + 𝑇 + 2𝑃 + 𝑙/𝐵, where 𝑡 ′ is the time the grant for the
previous chunk was issued. Hence, 𝑡 must be 𝑡 ′ + 𝑙/𝐵,

3.1.1 Scheduler design. EDM’s scheduler has two components: notification (used to acquire the global memory
traffic demand) and grant (used to schedule memory traffic
using an online maximal matching algorithm). At a high
level, senders notify the switch of any memory messages
they want to send over the network and then wait for the
switch to grant them the permission to send. The switch, on
the other hand, stores the notifications for all the memory
messages from all senders in a single logical queue, called a
demand notification queue, and runs an online maximal
matching algorithm to schedule memory messages from the
notification queue in a way that ensures both high bandwidth utilization and zero queuing. Furthermore, to achieve
a near-optimal message completion time under bandwidth
contention, EDM extends the maximal matching algorithm
with priority-based scheduling, where it assigns a priority
value to each memory message and resolves matching conflicts in favor of the message with the highest priority. EDM
chooses the optimal priority assignment scheme based on
the nature of the memory traffic workload.
• Notification. For WREQ messages, senders send an explicit demand notification to the switch containing the
message’s destination and message size, and then wait for
a grant before sending the message. For RREQ/RMWREQ–
RRES message pairs, the RREQ/RMWREQ message serves
as an implicit demand notification for the corresponding
RRES message. Senders send the RREQ/RMWREQ message to the switch without sending any prior notification.
On receiving an RREQ/RMWREQ message from source 𝑠
destined to 𝑑, the switch adds the message to the demand
notification queue and uses the number of bytes to be read
as specified in the RREQ as the demand for RRES message
from 𝑑 to 𝑠. For RMWREQ, the RRES size is inferred based

382

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

i.e., we must mark the source and destination of message 𝑚 as not_busy after 𝑙/𝐵 time units have elapsed
since the grant for 𝑚 was issued.

distributed systems that only assume that the memory
requests from a given process (or node) will be scheduled
in-order but do not make any scheduling (or ordering)
assumptions for memory requests across processes (or
nodes). Instead, they rely on the applications to use explicit synchronization primitives, such as locks and mutexes, to ensure consistency [19]. EDM can support such
synchronization primitives using the RMWREQ messages,
as described in §3.2.1.

EDM’s scheduler design leads to following key properties:
1. Maximal matching with zero queuing. The grant algorithm implements the well-known greedy algorithm for
online maximal bipartite matching [11]. Maximal matching leads to near-optimal bandwidth utilization in practice [6], as it ensures that a message is not scheduled only
if either its source or destination is already busy sending or receiving other messages. Another consequence of
matching is it guarantees that there will be at most one
source sending to a destination at any given time, thus
resulting in zero queuing and no drops at the switch.
2. Zero processing delay during forwarding. Whenever
the scheduler issues a grant for message 𝑚: 𝑠→𝑑, it practically creates a virtual PHY circuit between 𝑠 and 𝑑. Hence,
the data from message 𝑚 does not need any processing at
the switch during forwarding, e.g., no header parsing or
table look up as typically needed for layer 2 forwarding.
3. Reduced transport overhead at the host. With an innetwork scheduler that proactively avoids congestion and
ensures no data loss due to queuing, one no longer needs a
transport stack at the hosts implementing complex end-toend reliability, flow and congestion control protocols. This
further reduces the latency on the data path for memory
messages. In §3.3, we discuss how EDM handles losses
due to data corruption.
4. Near-optimal message completion time. The message
priority value in EDM can be set appropriately to achieve
near-optimal message completion time for different workloads. For light-tailed workloads, EDM sets the priority
value of a message as the time of its notification, to implement First Come First Serve (FCFS) scheduling, known
to be optimal for light-tailed workloads [93]. For heavytailed workloads, EDM sets the priority value of a message
as the remaining bytes in the message (a state that the
grant algorithm already maintains), to implement Shortest Remaining Processing Time (SRPT) [70] scheduling,
known to be optimal for heavy-tailed workloads [93].
5. In-order message delivery. EDM ensures that the memory messages between a compute–memory node pair are
delivered in-order. In general, a non-FCFS scheduling policy such as SRPT may result in out-of-order delivery, but
EDM guards against this by applying the SRPT policy only
across messages from different compute–memory node
pairs. As a consequence, EDM does not provide any ordering guarantees for messages originating from different
compute nodes. EDM’s ordering semantics are consistent with existing Ethernet-based memory disaggregation
systems, such as RDMA-based systems, as well as with
the assumptions made in modern multi-processing and

3.1.2 Scheduler hardware pipeline. The primary data
structure that the scheduler maintains is the demand notification queue. The notification queue must be a priority
queue to implement priority-based scheduling policies such
as SRPT. Logically, the scheduler maintains a single global
notification queue. But in practice, this would bottleneck the
rate of insertions, as one could only add one notification per
clock cycle to a single queue, but the switch may receive
anywhere between 0 and 𝑁 notifications in a given clock
cycle, where 𝑁 is the number of switch ports. A single queue
also makes it challenging to perform parallel operations on
the queue elements. Hence, EDM maintains 𝑁 notification
queues, one per destination switch port. The notification
queue for the destination port 𝑑 stores notifications for messages whose destination host is connected to the port 𝑑. EDM
bounds the size of per port notification queues to 𝑋 ∗𝑁 . Here,
𝑋 is the maximum number of active notifications allowed per
source–destination pair. This is achieved by senders rate limiting their active notifications to at most 𝑋 per destination.
As an optimization, senders may also batch several small
active messages between a source–destination pair into one
"mega" message and send 1 notification for that mega message. In our evaluations, we empirically find that the value
of 𝑋 =3 works best (§4.3). Next, EDM uses recent hardware
data structures for ordered lists [57–59, 63] to implement
its notification queues. These data structures could perform
priority queue operations in a constant number of clock cycles. In particular, the latency of inserts and deletes is 2 clock
cycles, with both operations fully pipelined, i.e., one may
issue a new operation every clock cycle. The latency to get
the highest priority element in the queue is 1 clock cycle.
Next, the scheduler must implement an online maximal
matching over the set of messages in the notification queue.
A naive implementation of the matching algorithm, as described in Steps (3)—(5) of the grant algorithm (§3.1.1), would
match one source–destination pair each clock cycle. This
would take ∼𝑁 clock cycles to form a maximal matching.
Instead, EDM borrows inspiration from the classic Parallel
Iterative Matching (PIM) [6] algorithm, which performs the
matching for each destination switch port in parallel.
PIM is an iterative algorithm that forms a matching in each
iteration and on average takes ∼𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑁 ) iterations to form
a maximal matching. EDM extends PIM’s design to incorporate message priorities to implement scheduling policies

383

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

3.1.4 Network bandwidth and latency overhead. Assuming 𝑚 is the memory message for which notification/grant
is issued, both notification and grant message will contain
the destination of 𝑚 (9 bits for a cluster of size 512), the message id of 𝑚 used to distinguish messages between the same
source–destination pair (8 bits), and size of 𝑚 for notification
or chunk size for grant (16 bits). In addition, a notification
is sent once for every WREQ message, while a grant is sent
once for every chunk. For a chunk size and WREQ message
size equal to the burst size for DDR4 (64 B), the bandwidth
overhead for both grant and notification is limited to 6%.
This is further reduced for larger chunk/message sizes.
The latency overhead for WREQ messages is ∼RTT/2, i.e.,
the time it takes to send a notification message to the switch
and receive a grant message back, before sending the actual
WREQ message. In a rack or cluster setting where RTTs are
extremely small, this overhead is only a few nanoseconds,
which is a small price to pay to avoid queuing delays at the
switch. Further, for RREQ, RMWREQ, and RRES messages,
the above latency overhead does not apply, as the switch
treats the RREQ/RMWREQ messages as implicit demand
notifications for the corresponding RRES messages, and the
memory node treats the received RREQ/RMWREQ messages
from the switch as implicit grants for RRES messages.

such as SRPT. EDM implements each iteration of prioritybased PIM in exactly 3 clock cycles. In the first clock cycle of
each matching iteration, each destination port 𝑑 in parallel
chooses the highest priority eligible message 𝑚: 𝑠→𝑑 from
its respective notification queue, i.e., the highest priority
message with both 𝑠 and 𝑑 marked not_busy, and issues a
request to form the corresponding matching between 𝑠 and
𝑑. This takes 1 clock cycle using the fast hardware priority
queue data structure for the notification queue. In the second
clock cycle, each source port 𝑠, in parallel, checks if multiple
destination ports issued a matching request to 𝑠, and if so, it
generates a grant for the message 𝑚 𝑗 : 𝑠→𝑑 𝑗 with the highest
priority, while discarding the remaining matching requests.
In the third clock cycle, 𝑠 and 𝑑 𝑗 are marked as busy and we
move on to the next iteration of PIM.
One of the challenges in the above design is to find the
highest priority request from the set 𝑀 = {𝑚𝑖 : 𝑠→𝑑𝑖 } of all
matching requests for a source port 𝑠, during the second
cycle of each PIM iteration. Naïvely, this would take 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛)
clock cycles, where 𝑛 is the number of requests in the set 𝑀.
However, EDM does this in exactly 1 clock cycle by intelligently trading off hardware resources for time. In particular,
EDM maintains an array of size 𝑁 per source port 𝑠. The
array stores the destination port numbers 𝑑𝑖 sorted by the
highest priority value in each 𝑑𝑖 ’s notification queue, and a
boolean value for each array index, initialized to 0. The array
is implemented using the same ordered list data structure as
the notification queue, and just like the notification queue,
it is updated on the arrival of each demand notification or
whenever the priority of a message changes (e.g., when the
remaining message size changes in SRPT). Given this, during
the second cycle of a matching iteration, for each source
port 𝑠 in parallel, each destination port 𝑑𝑖 with the matching request for message 𝑚𝑖 : 𝑠→𝑑𝑖 sets the boolean value in
the array index storing 𝑑𝑖 to 1 in parallel, while a priority
encoder [68] synchronously returns the most significant index in the array set to 1, which, in turn, corresponds to the
destination port with the highest priority matching request.

3.2 Network Stack
In this section, we describe the design of EDM’s host and
switch network stack for remote memory access.
EDM ’s network stack operates in the Ethernet PHY. As
shown in Figure 3, Ethernet PHY has three components:
Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS), Physical Medium Attachment (PMA), and Physical Medium Dependent (PMD). EDM’s
logic sits in the PCS layer between the encoder and the scrambler modules on the transmit (TX) path and between the
decoder and the descrambler modules on the receive (RX)
path. The reason for this architecture is two-fold. First, in
the 10/25/40/100+ GbE standard, the encoder module in the
PCS layer reformats the input frame on the TX path into a
sequence of 66-bit blocks. Thus, the interface between the encoder and the scrambler on the TX path and the descrambler
and the decoder on the RX path is 66-bit blocks. Hence, by
sitting in between, EDM is able to operate at a fine-grained
data transfer unit of 66 bits. Second, the encoder also adds
the idle characters (all 0s by default) to form the inter-frame
gap (IFG), and the decoder subsequently removes them on
the RX path. Thus, by sitting at the output of the encoder
(and input of the decoder), EDM is able to utilize the bandwidth otherwise used by idle characters to carry memory
messages [36, 37, 39, 60, 91]. In order to comply with the
Ethernet standard, on the RX side, EDM extracts the memory messages and replaces them with idle characters (all 0s)
before sending them to the decoder.
A 66-bit PHY block output from the encoder comprises 2
bits of sync header and 64 bits of block payload. An Ethernet

3.1.3 Scheduling latency and throughput. As discussed
in §3.1.2, EDM takes 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑁 ) iterations on average to form
a maximal matching. Given that EDM implements each iteration in 3 clock cycles, it takes 3 ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑁 ) clock cycles
on average to form a maximal matching. Given a clock rate
of 𝑅 GHz for the scheduler hardware pipeline (§3.1.2), the
latency to form a maximal matching is 𝑇 = 3 ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑁 )/𝑅 ns.
Hence, to achieve line rate scheduling, EDM needs to set the
minimum chunk size to 𝑇 ns transmission time, to ensure
that the link remains busy while forming the next maximal
matching. Our scheduler design is estimated to run at 3 GHz
on an ASIC (§4.1), thus needing only 9 ns on average to form
a maximal matching for a 512-port switch. Hence, to achieve
line rate scheduling for 512×100 Gbps switch, EDM would
set the minimum chunk size to 128 B.

384

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Media Access Control (MAC)
Reconciliation Sublayer (RS)

Physical Layer (PHY)

Message
Queue

Data
Buﬀers

non-memory
traﬃc

non-memory
traﬃc

memory
traﬃc

non-memory
traﬃc

non-memory
traﬃc

Encoder

Decoder

Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS)
Encoder

Decoder

EDM TX

EDM RX

Scrambler

Descrambler

Gearbox

Blocksync

Decoder

Encoder

non-mem
non-mem
blocks
blocks

non-mem
blocks

Scheduler
Grant

Physical Medium Attachment (PMA)
Physical Medium Dependent (PMD)

Egress

Ingress

Message
State
Table

Descrambler

(b) EDM Host Network Stack

Notify

/M*/ blocks

Grant Queue
Scrambler

non-mem
blocks

Scrambler

Descrambler

(c) EDM Switch Network Stack

(a) Ethernet Stack

Figure 3. EDM network stack.
queue. EDM assigns each dequeued message a message id in
order to distinguish messages destined for the same destination. For the dequeued RREQ/RMWREQ message, EDM
sends the message along with its message id to the switch
using /M*/ blocks. It also adds an entry to the message state
table, indexed by <message destination, message id>, containing the local memory address to which the corresponding
RRES must be written. For the dequeued WREQ message,
EDM creates an /N/ block (§3.1.4) and sends it to the switch,
while storing the corresponding WREQ state (remote memory address, data buffer address) in the message state table.
On the RX side, when receiving a /G/ block, EDM adds it
to a grant queue, while when receiving RREQ /M*/ blocks (at
the memory node), EDM sends the blocks to the memory controller and adds an entry to the grant queue to generate the
corresponding RRES message. Once the data corresponding
to an RREQ has been read from the memory, a corresponding
entry is added to the message state table pointing to the data
buffer storing the read data. Asynchronously, the TX side
dequeues from the grant queue, looks up the corresponding
message entry in the message state table for the remote memory write address and data buffer address, reads a chunk of
bytes from the data buffer as requested in the grant, and generates a WREQ message (at the compute node) or an RRES
message with the message id of the corresponding RREQ (at
the memory node) using /M*/ blocks. On receiving the /M*/
data blocks corresponding to an RRES message, EDM writes
them to the local memory after reading the corresponding
memory address from the message state table. On receiving
the /M*/ data blocks corresponding to a WREQ message,
EDM sends them directly to the memory controller.

frame starts with an /S/ control block, followed by several
/D/ data blocks, and ends with a /T/ control block. Ethernet
also has a special /E/ control block that is typically used to
make up the IFG. Each control block has a sync header value
of "01" and an 8-bit block type, followed by 56 bits of payload
(which could be frame data). The data block has sync header
value of "10" and 64 bits of payload containing frame data.
Ethernet enforces at least 9 PHY blocks (/S/, /T/, 7 /D/ blocks)
per frame to meet the minimum Ethernet frame size.
In order to distinguish memory messages from normal
Ethernet traffic to provide differentiated service in the PHY,
EDM introduces a new set of block types collectively called
/M*/ blocks. An /MD/ block is identical to the /D/ data block
except that it carries memory data. An /MS/ control block
marks the start of a memory message, and an /MT/ block
marks the end. EDM also introduces an /MST/ control block
to support memory messages that may fit within a single PHY
block. Thus, unlike an Ethernet frame that must comprise
at least 9 PHY blocks, a memory message in EDM can be as
small as a single PHY block. EDM also introduces an /N/ and
a /G/ control block to send demand notifications and grant
messages, respectively (§3.1.4). To distinguish EDM control
blocks from each other and from standard Ethernet control
blocks, we assign them unique unused block-type values.
3.2.1 Host network stack. Figure 3 shows the architecture of EDM’s host network stack. EDM’s data path runs
in parallel with the standard Ethernet data path carrying
non-memory traffic. In order to distinguish remote memory
messages from non-memory messages (e.g., IP and storage),
EDM introduces four new APIs to generate memory messages (RREQ, WREQ, RMWREQ, RRES), as described in §2.3.
On the TX side, the generated RREQ/RMWREQ/WREQ
messages are stored in a message queue, along with a pointer
to a data buffer storing the data to be written (for WREQ).
EDM continuously dequeues messages from the message

Implementing RMWREQ. On receiving an RMWREQ message from a compute node, the NIC at the memory node issues the corresponding read request to the local memory controller, followed by the modify operation on the read value

385

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

as dictated by the opcode. Finally, the NIC writes the modified value to local memory. All three steps are performed
atomically, i.e., they are not preempted by other incoming
memory requests. Once the atomic read-modify-write operation is finished, the memory node may respond with an
RRES message. EDM uses this architecture to implement an
atomic compare-and-swap (CAS) for locks and mutexes.

to schedule the transmission of memory (/N/ or /M*/) and
non-memory blocks (although in principle one could use any
scheduling policy, e.g., strictly prioritizing memory blocks
over non-memory blocks). The scheduling granularity of 66
bits ensures that a memory block is not blocked for the entire
duration of transmission of a non-memory frame. However,
a consequence of this design is that the PHY blocks in a
non-memory Ethernet frame may arrive in non-consecutive
cycles at the receiver (but still in order). Unfortunately, the
decoder module in PCS and the Ethernet MAC layer expect
the blocks from a frame to arrive in consecutive clock cycles for their correct operation. To enforce this, on the RX
side, EDM maintains a buffer at the input of the decoder
module to buffer the blocks from a non-memory Ethernet
frame until it receives a /T/ block, marking the end of that
frame. After that, EDM sends the blocks from the buffer in
consecutive clock cycles to the higher layers. The size of this
buffer is bounded by the maximum-sized Ethernet frame.
The buffering does add a nominal latency on the RX data
path for non-memory frames even in the absence of memory
messages, equal to the transmission delay of that frame. On
the TX side, EDM bounds the non-memory buffer size in
an event of preemption by sending a back-pressure all the
way up to the application’s interface to the MAC layer. The
latency of this data path is deterministic and equal to 4 clock
cycles, thus bounding the buffer size to 4 PHY blocks.

Latency of EDM host processing. Generating an /N/ or
an RREQ /M*/ block takes 2 clock cycles—reading from the
message queue (1 cycle) and creating the block while writing
to the message state table in parallel (1 cycle). Reading a
grant from the grant queue takes 4 clock cycles, as grant
queue crosses the RX and TX clock domains. Generating an
/M*/ data block for an RRES/WREQ message takes 3 clock
cycles—reading from the message state table (1 cycle), reading from the data buffer (1 cycle), creating the block (1 cycle).
Processing a received /G/ block takes 2 clock cycles—parsing
(1 cycle) and adding to grant queue (1 cycle). Processing a received RREQ /M*/ block takes an additional 1 clock cycle for
sending to the memory controller. Processing a received /M*/
block from an RRES/WREQ message takes 3 clock cycles—
parsing (1 cycle), extracting the memory address (1 cycle),
sending data to the application/memory controller (1 cycle).
3.2.2 Switch network stack. Figure 3 shows the architecture of EDM’s switch network stack. A grant generated
by the scheduler is sent to the corresponding host using
a /G/ block. Generating a /G/ block takes 1 clock cycle.
On receiving a block, it takes 1 clock cycle to identify /N/,
/G/, /M*/ blocks by checking the block type. When receiving an /N/ block or an /M*/ block(s) corresponding to an
RREQ/RMWREQ message, EDM buffers them in the notification queue (§3.1.1). Instead, on receiving /M*/ blocks from
WREQ or RRES messages on the RX of an ingress port, EDM
forwards them to the TX of the corresponding egress port.
The mapping of RX and TX for each message is set up by the
scheduler during the grant (§3.1.1), so no processing is done
on the received /M*/ blocks for forwarding. The latency of
forwarding is 4 clock cycles to account for the movement of
data from the RX to the TX clock domain.

3.3 Practical Concerns
This section discusses several practical concerns with EDM.
Interoperability. EDM modifies the Ethernet PHY in both
the NIC and the switch. To access remote memory using
EDM, one would need an EDM-capable NIC at both the
compute and the memory node, as well as an EDM-capable
switch in between. However, it is important to note that
EDM does not replace the standard Ethernet pipeline on
these devices; it simply creates a parallel pipeline to carry
memory traffic. Hence, EDM-capable NICs and switches can
still communicate with non-EDM Ethernet devices in the
network using the standard Ethernet pipeline.
Host integration. EDM’s design is oblivious to the specific
interconnect technology used in the hosts to connect the
NIC to the processor and the memory controller. One may
use any low latency interconnect, such as an AXI4 bus (used
in our prototype (Figure 4)) or one of the many emerging
low latency peripheral interconnects [30, 73, 75, 78, 79, 86].

3.2.3 Reducing interference of non-memory traffic.
In converged Ethernet, memory traffic co-exists with traditional non-memory traffic (e.g., IP and storage). As discussed
in §2.4, the inability to preempt the transmission of an Ethernet frame at the MAC layer may result in non-memory
traffic interfering with the memory traffic sharing the same
link, potentially increasing the latency for memory traffic.
To reduce this interference, EDM presents a novel design of
intra-frame preemption, enabled by PHY processing.
Intra-frame preemption. For each link, on the TX path,
EDM maintains a buffer at the output of the encoder module
in the PCS layer to store the 66-bit PHY blocks from nonmemory traffic. By default, EDM implements fair scheduling

Application integration. For remote memory access, an
application may generate EDM messages in §2.3 directly
(similar to RDMA), or use the traditional load/store API and
rely on a shim layer to convert the load/store instructions
into the corresponding EDM messages. In both cases, the
application will use virtual memory addresses, and a shim
layer will intercept all memory requests and perform the virtual to physical memory address translation before directing

386

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

a request to either the local memory controller or to EDM’s
stack for remote memory access, depending upon whether
the physical memory address is local or remote, respectively.
The design of such a shim layer is beyond the scope of this
paper, but there are prior works [27, 53] that use a similar
shim layer for remote memory that could be adapted to EDM.

Compute Node (FPGA 1)
Application

EDM Scheduler

Network Interface
Ethernet PHY

Handling data corruption. While EDM guarantees no data
loss due to congestion, there may be loss due to data corruption over a link. In datacenters, data corruption over a link
is generally attributed to external factors such as physical
damage, bending, or transceiver contamination due to airborne dirt particles, resulting in data transmission errors [96].
These errors are not transient, and the only sustainable solution is to disable the damaged link and switch to a back-up
network if available (as discussed below) or wait for an operator to fix the link. In the Ethernet PHY, the scrambler module
checks for data corruption, and if corruption is observed over
a link, EDM disables that link.

P0: EDM

P1: EDM

P1: EDM

Ethernet
SerDes

Ethernet
SerDes

Port P0

Memory Node (FPGA 2)

Ethernet PHY

AXI4 bus

P0: EDM

Switch (FPGA 3)

Port P0

Port P1

Port P1

DDR4 controller
AXI4 bus
Network Interface
Ethernet PHY
P0: EDM

P1: EDM

Ethernet
SerDes

Port P0

Port P1

Figure 4. Testbed setup.

4

Evaluation

We evaluated the performance of EDM using an FPGA-based
hardware testbed and large-scale network simulations.
4.1 Hardware Prototype
We implemented EDM’s traffic scheduler (§3.1) and the host
and switch stacks (§3.2) in Verilog by modifying an opensource 25 Gb Ethernet PHY [72]. We synthesized EDM on
AMD/Xilinx Alveo U200 FPGA [88] with two network interface ports and 64 GB off-chip DDR4 DIMMs operating at a
total of 77 GB/s. Further, we envision our switch network
stack and the scheduler to eventually be implemented on a
multi-port ASIC switching chip. For that, we synthesized a
512-port EDM switch on Synopsys ASIC compiler [85], in
which EDM’s logic takes up only 10 𝑚𝑚 2 (1.5–3% of total
area of a modern switching chip [17]), and runs at 3 GHz.
The SRAM usage for the notification queue is 𝐾 ∗ 𝑁 2 bytes,
where 𝐾 denotes the length of each notification (§3.1.2) and
𝑁 is the number of ports. For 512 ports, this translates to
around 1 MB (1–2% of total SRAM on a modern switch [45]).
Supporting 100+ GbE. We prototyped EDM in 25 GbE
due to the lack of open-source higher-speed Ethernet PHY.
However, since Ethernet scales to higher speeds by bundling
lower speed PHY lanes [64], e.g., 100GBASE-KR4 is based
on 4×25 GbE, our implementation can port to higher speed
Ethernet with minimal changes.

Fault tolerance. Within EDM’s architecture, the switch is a
single point-of-failure. This is no different than any datacenter rack with a single Top-of-Rack (ToR) switch. To guard
against such failure, modern datacenter racks typically have
a back-up ToR switch network that takes over in case either
the primary switch or a link in the primary network fails.
In such racks, all hosts have two network interfaces with
two links connecting to the two ToR switches. We could also
use a similar fault tolerance technique for EDM. However,
unlike traditional ToR switches, EDM’s switch also stores
state for scheduling memory traffic, which will be lost on
switch failure, potentially disrupting the entire system’s operation. One could guard against this by using the classic
state machine replication [54]. In particular, on the sender
side, EDM would mirror every outgoing remote memory
message on both the NIC’s interfaces, so that both the primary and back-up switch observe and compute on the same
set of messages to have their state synchronized at all times.
On the receive side, EDM would accept the first received
copy of a memory message and ignore the duplicate received
on the other interface. We note that a general state machine
replication relies on a consensus protocol [34] to achieve
agreement on operation order at each replica. But this is not
needed in EDM as all communications happen over a single
hop, thus guaranteeing no message re-ordering.
Besides switch and link failure, a memory node failure
may also disrupt system’s operation. In particular, it may
result in a deadlock, where an application at a compute node
might block and wait indefinitely for a remote memory read
response. Note that such a deadlock would never occur in
normal operation, as EDM guarantees no data loss under
no failure. However, to ensure the deadlock doesn’t happen
even under failure, EDM would set a timer for each remote
read request, and if the timer expires, EDM would reply to
the application with a NULL (zero size) read response.

4.2 Testbed Experiments
Set up. We connected two EDM FPGAs to a 2-port EDM
FPGA switch. We use one FPGA to emulate the memory
node, and the other to emulate the compute node (Figure 4).
Baselines. We connected two FPGAs using a layer 2 Tofino
switch [77]. We ported three different network stacks to
the FPGAs as baselines—(i) raw Ethernet (standard Ethernet
MAC + PHY only); (ii) an open-source FPGA implementation
of TCP/IP over Ethernet [62]; and (iii) an open-source FPGA
implementation of RDMA over Ethernet (RoCEv2) [62].
Workload. Random reads and writes from compute to memory node. RRES and WREQ are 64 B, while RREQ is 8 B.

387

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

TCP/IP in hardware
Read
Write

Latency Source

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

RDMA (RoCEv2)
Read
Write

Raw Ethernet
Read
Write

EDM
Read

Write

At Compute Node
Protocol stack
Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY (PCS)

2×666.2 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

666.2 ns
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

2×230.2 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

230.2 ns
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

0
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

0
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

0
0
2×5.12
+ 12.8 ns

0
0
3×5.12
+ 28.16 ns

At Switch
Layer 2 forwarding
Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY (PCS)

2×400 ns
4×7.68 ns
4×7.68 ns

400 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

2×400 ns
4×7.68 ns
4×7.68 ns

400 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

2×400 ns
4×7.68 ns
4×7.68 ns

400 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

0
0
4×5.12
+ 28.16 ns

0
0
4×5.12
+ 28.16 ns

At Memory Node
Protocol stack
Ethernet MAC
Ethernet PHY (PCS)

2×666.2 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

666.2 ns
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

2×230.2 ns
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

230.2 ns
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

0
2×7.68 ns
2×7.68 ns

0
7.68 ns
7.68 ns

0
0
2×5.12
+ 25.6 ns

0
0
5.12
+ 7.68 ns

Network Stack Latency

3.59 𝜇s

1.79 𝜇s

1.84 𝜇s

0.92 𝜇s

0.92 𝜇s

461.44 ns

107.52 ns

104.96 ns

Ethernet PHY (PMA+PMD)
+ Transceiver delay
Propagation delay

8×19 ns

4×19 ns

8×19 ns

4×19 ns

8×19 ns

4×19 ns

8×19 ns

8×19 ns

4×10 ns

2×10 ns

4×10 ns

2×10 ns

4×10 ns

2×10 ns

4×10 ns

4×10 ns

Total Fabric Latency

3.79 𝜇s

1.89 𝜇s

2.03 𝜇s

1.02 𝜇s

1.11 𝜇s

557.44 ns

299.52 ns

296.96 ns

Table 1. Ethernet fabric latency for remote read and write for four different stacks — TCP/IP, RoCEv2, Raw Ethernet, and EDM.
The one-hop propagation delay is 10 ns. The latency of TCP/IP and RoCEv2 protocol stacks only include data path latency, i.e.,
packet header encapsulation/decapsulation and parsing. It does not include latency of control operations, like connection and
queue pair set up. The latency for layer 2 forwarding is for a switch programmed to only perform layer 2 forwarding using a
single exact match forwarding table [Breakdown – Parsing (87 ns), Match-Action and table look up (202 ns), Packet Manager
(93 ns), Crossbar (18 ns)]. The latency for read is typically double that of write to account for the latency of both RREQ and
RRES vs. only WREQ. The overhead of EDM’s mechanisms is highlighted in blue (fine-grained breakdown in Figure 5).
Table 1

EDM

Grant

2 cycles

1 cycle

2 cycles

2 cycles

RREQ

3 cycles

TD+PD
TX

11

2.09090909090909

0.56

7

1.9

3.68421052631579

0.8

0

0

20.4

9

20.4

9

20.4

9

F

scheduler ensures no congestion and packet drops, thus obviating the need for complex transport mechanisms used in
TCP and RoCEv2. Further, EDM’s scheduler practically forms
a virtual circuit
betweenRDMA
the source and destination in the
EDM
PHY,
30 thus eliminating the need for layer 2 packet processing
at the switch, which includes parsing, table look-up, buffer22.5scheduling, and store-and-forward. The trade-off is a
ing,
few extra cycles in the PHY for EDM. Additionally, EDM’s
15
novel intra-frame preemption mechanism (§3.2.3) ensures
1.2
0.8
that
the
non-memory
traffic
has
minimal
interference
on
7.5
0.4
the memory traffic. Our testbed experiments showed that
even0 under interference from IP traffic, EDM maintained0a
A
B
C
F
near-constant
∼300
ns remote
memory
access latency.
mrps

TX

1 cycle

4 cycles

3 cycles

1 cycle

5 cycles

3 cycles

1 cycle

4 cycles

7 cycles

Figure 5. Breakdown of latency for EDM’s network fabric
for 64 B read and write. TD+PD = transmission+propagation
delay. A clock cycle is 2.56 ns. For details on the cycle numbers refer to §3.2.1 and §3.2.2.

25

EDM

RDMA

12.5
0

A

B

YCSB workload

F

Figure 6. Illustrates a PHY protocol such as EDM can achieve
much higher bandwidth utilization (throughput) compared
to protocols implemented on top of Ethernet MAC (RDMA).

388

1.04

2.26666666666667
2.68059542796385

Memory Node
RX

EDM

23

1.9

5 cycles
7 cycles

WREQ

RRES

RX

Raw Ethernet

11

7

Million req. per sec

READ

WRITE

Notify

Switch

TD+PD

TX

RDMA

23

B

Latency (us)

Compute Node
RX

EDM

A

C

4.2.1 Remote memory access latency. In Table 1 we report latency in our unloaded testbed. EDM only adds 299 ns
and 296 ns for remote read and write, respectively. This is
comparable to a two hop NUMA latency within a server [49]
as well as CXL latency with a single switch [41]. Furthermore, the read (write) latency is 3.7× (1.9×), 6.8× (3.4×),
and 12.7× (6.4×) lower than the raw Ethernet, RoCEv2 and
TCP/IP stacks, respectively. This is a combined consequence
of EDM’s in-network scheduler and in-PHY stack. EDM’s

RDMA

5.12+27+2.56×150
0÷8
42.36

Baseline

Raw Ether

115
0

100:10 66:34 50:50 34:66 10:100

0

100:10

50:50

10:100

0

100:10

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation
1800

Latency (ns)

1150

EDM

CXL

nodes implement EDM’s host stack, while the switch implements EDM’s switch stack and the in-network scheduler.
DDR4
The latency
of each of the EDM’s modules and the propaga~82ns
tion delay were configured to match the testbed from Table 1.
We scaled the link bandwidth to 100 Gbps.
Baselines. We evaluated EDM’s scheduler against six classes
of congestion and flow control protocols: (i) DCTCP [1], a
representative sender-driven protocol; (ii) IRD, an idealized receiver-driven protocol [12, 16, 23, 28, 47] that notifies
each receiver of new flows in zero time. It combines the
best features of existing protocols, like SRPT scheduling
(from Homa [47], pHost [23], NDP [28]), and switch credit
rate-limiting (from Expresspass [16]); (iii) pFabric [3], a
representative in-network scheduling protocol running on
top of DCTCP; (iv) PFC [89], a lossless flow control with
DCQCN [95] as congestion control; (v) CXL, a lossless interconnect relying on PCIe’s inherent credit-based flow control [79, 92]; and (vi) Fastpass [51], a centralized serverbased flow scheduler, with 100 Gbps server bandwidth and
an idealized assumption that it can solve the global scheduling problem infinitely fast.
EDM scheduler parameters. We set the chunk size to 256 B
and the maximum number of active notifications allowed
per source–destination pair to 3.

RDMA

300

150

100:10

66:34

50:50

Local : Remote

34:66

10:100

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

500
450

0

50:50

10:100

Figure 7. End-to-end latency for YCSB workload.
4.2.2 Real application performance. We implemented
a remote key-value store on EDM’s testbed and used a cycleaccurate FPGA hardware simulator to evaluate EDM against
the baselines using the YCSB workload [18].
Bandwidth utilization. We stored the entire key-value
store on the remote memory node and generated read/write
requests at the compute node based on YCSB’s workloads A,
B and F [18]. Each workload has a different read-write request
distribution, A: 50% write, B: 5% write, and F: 33% write.
Each remote read request (8 B) queries for 1 KB data, while a
remote write request carries 100 B data. Figure 6 shows that
EDM is able to achieve around 2.7× more throughput than
RDMA in terms of requests per second. This is because of a
combination of RoCEv2’s transport protocol overhead, MAC
layer minimum 64 B frame size constraint, and IFG overhead
(§2). In contrast, in the PHY, EDM is able to avoid transport
encapsulation, transmit data in 66-bit blocks, and repurpose
the IFG to send memory traffic (§3.2), thus saturating the
entire link. Overall, this experiment highlights the benefit of
operating in the PHY for the utilization of the link bandwidth.
Latency. We distribute the key-value objects in different
ratios between the local DRAM at the compute node and
the remote DRAM at the memory node. The compute node
issues read/write requests based on YCSB’s workload A to
either the remote or its local memory. We report the average
request latency and variance in Figure 7. We compare EDM’s
performance against CXL simulation [41] and RDMA measurement in Table 1. Figure 7 shows that EDM achieves a
significantly lower latency than RDMA while within 1.3× the
latency of CXL. Note that although EDM is slightly slower
than CXL in this small, unloaded testbed, in §4.3 we show
that CXL scales much worse than EDM with a larger number
of nodes and higher network load.

4.3.1 Latency microbenchmark. This experiment evaluated the effect of network load on remote memory access
latency reported in §4.2.1. We generated all-to-all traffic between the compute and memory nodes with varying load
values. The workload comprised a mixture of random remote
memory reads and writes of size 64 B, with 8 B RREQ.
We calculated the latency of each read and write and normalized them by the corresponding unloaded latency (Table 1). As shown in Figure 8a, EDM’s read is within 1.2×,
and write is within 1.3× of its unloaded latency across all
load values. IRD performs close to EDM at low load, but
degrades quickly due to bandwidth under-utilization from
its decentralized scheduling (§2.4), which highlights the benefit of centralized scheduling. Sender-driven protocols such
as DCTCP, pFabric, and PFC perform poorly at high load
due to their reactive nature (§2.4), highlighting the benefit
of proactive congestion control in EDM. Typically, pFabric
outperforms DCTCP, but here their performance is identical
due to uniformly single-packet flows in the workload, which
makes SRPT scheduling used in pFabric ineffective. Finally,
Fastpass uses a centralized scheduler similar to EDM, but
the bandwidth of the central server becomes the bottleneck
(which is more than 100× less than the aggregate cluster
bandwidth), as it is overwhelmed by the large number of
per-flow notification and grant messages. This highlights
the benefit of in-network scheduling on switch hardware.
Finally, CXL’s point-to-point flow control fails in congested
environment, as frequent incasts would rapidly consume
credits on switch egress ports (victim) and that the deficit

4.3 Network Simulations
To evaluate EDM’s performance at scale, we complemented
our hardware testbed with a network simulator written in C.
The goal of the simulator is to evaluate the efficacy of EDM’s
in-network scheduler at scale under varying network loads.
Set up. We simulated a disaggregated cluster with 144 nodes
(compute + memory) connected using a single switch. The

389

S
(S p
o
Sp rt
(Q ark
ue S
ry
)
G
(F rap
ilt h
er
M ing
e
(K mc
Vs ac
to
re
)

H
a
(S d
or
t)

Mixed write:read, load=0.8.

(b) Average MCT of traces from diﬀerent
disaggregated applications.

(a) Average latency of random 64B remote memory reads and
writes with varying network load and mixture ratios.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
PFabric

PFC

40

5
2

5
2

15
2

1

1

1

Normalized latency

40

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.9

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.9

DCTCP

30

0

Fastpass

18
14

100:0 80:20 50:50 20:80 0:100
Mixed write:read, load=0.8.

Reads.

Writes.

CXL

Normalized msg completion time

IRD

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

(a) Average latency of random 64B remote memory reads and
writes with varying network load and mixture ratios.

9
5
1
0
H
a
(S do
or op
t)

EDM

WREQ is worse than RREQ because the size distribution of Read flows a
of 64B RRES but during flow initilization in simulator, the RREQs are 8B s
lower than synthetic value. We believe this factor can be oﬀsetted by rea

S
(S par
o k
Sp rt)
(Q ark
ue SQ
ry L
)
G
(F rap
ilt hL
er a
M ing b
)
e
(K mc
Vs ac
to he
re d
)

Reads.

Writes.

(b) Average MCT of traces from diﬀerent
disaggregated applications.

Figure 8. Network simulation.
would consequently block or slow down all other ingress
ports that have traffic destined to the victim. This is similar
to head-of-line blocking in PFC [95].
In addition, we also conducted an experiment that included a mixture of RREQ and WREQ in different ratios.
Figure 8a shows that EDM still achieves within 1.3× its unloaded latency for mixed requests.

For instance, soNUMA’s [50] fabric bears semblance to the
Intel QPI and AMD HTX that interconnect sockets into multiple NUMA domains. Aquila [24] uses a custom cell-switched
Dragonfly network fabric. Shoal [61] uses a fabric of ns-scale
reconfigurable circuit switches with a focus on building a
power-efficient rack-scale network for resource disaggregation. While, Compute Express Link (CXL) [25, 26, 41] facilitates low latency remote memory access through the PCIe
link. In contrast, EDM is built upon Ethernet, which has
several benefits over custom fabrics, as discussed in §2.2.
Recent years have also seen a growing interest in leveraging in-network computing for more efficient remote memory
access [9, 15, 38]. These works advocate for offloading key
memory management mechanisms, such as cache coherence
and memory address translation, to a programmable switch.

4.3.2 Disaggregated application workloads. Finally, we
evaluated EDM on disaggregated memory workloads, based
on public traces [22, 61]. The traces have a mixture of memory read and write requests in equal proportion with a heavytailed request size distribution that are derived from a variety
of real-world applications as described below.
• Hadoop (Sort). Dataset: Sort benchmark generator.
• Spark (Sort). Dataset: Sort benchmark generator.
• Spark SQL (Query). Dataset: Big Data Benchmark [65].
• GraphLab (Filtering). Dataset: Netflix movie rating data.
• Memcached (Key-value Store). Dataset: YCSB [18].
We measured the message completion time (MCT) for each
memory message and normalized it by the ideal completion
time, i.e., the time it would take for that message to complete
if it were the only message in the network. Figure 8b reports
the average MCT for EDM is between 1.2–1.4× the ideal
MCT. In contrast, MCTs for certain baseline protocols can be
extremely high, in particular, MCT for CXL can be up to 8×
higher than EDM, due to the reasons mentioned in §4.3.1.

5

6

Conclusion

We presented EDM, an ultra-low latency network fabric for
memory disaggregation over Ethernet. EDM is built around
two key design ideas. First, bypassing the Ethernet MAC
layer and implementing the network protocol stack for remote memory access entirely in the Ethernet PHY, thus eliminating fundamental latency and bandwidth overheads imposed by the MAC layer; and second, running a centralized
memory traffic scheduler in the switch’s PHY to fully eliminate the latency due to queuing and layer 2 packet processing
at the switch for memory traffic. Based on an FPGA hardware
testbed, we show that EDM’s fabric only incurs a latency of
∼300 ns in an unloaded network, for both remote memory
reads and writes. Using larger-scale network simulations,
we show that even at high network loads, EDM’s average
latency is within 1.3× its unloaded latency.

Related Work

Conventional memory disaggregation architectures relied
on RDMA for remote memory access, as seen in FaRM [19],
Infiniswap [27], CFM [4], and Redy [94]. Unfortunately, the
latency for remote memory access over RDMA can be of the
order of 𝜇s, as shown in our evaluation.
Over the years, there have also been several proposals for
novel hardware support for memory disaggregation [13, 14,
25, 26, 41, 50, 90]. Notably, some of these works propose a custom network fabric for better latency and cache-coherency.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and shepherd, Jichuan Chang, for their valuable feedback. This work
was partially supported by NSF grants CAREER-2239829,
CNS-2331111, and CCF-2402852.

390

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

A

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Artifact Appendix

3. For software network simulations, we collected message traces from a diverse set of real-world disaggregated applications [22] and analyzed the statistical distribution of message sizes to generate synthetic traces
with different network loads.

A.1 Abstract
The artifact consists of three main components:
1. A Verilog implementation of EDM PHY. This implementation demonstrates the practical feasibility and
unloaded latency of EDM’s design (Table 1).
2. A cycle-accurate FPGA hardware simulator showing
EDM’s end-to-end performance in terms of latency
and bandwidth utilization for a real-world application
over realistic workloads (Figure 6 and 7).
3. A network simulator in C, demonstrating EDM’s performance at scale and under varying network loads,
particularly showcasing the efficacy of its in-network
scheduling mechanisms (Figure 8).

A.4 Installation
Hardware validation requires Vivado licensing; please follow
https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/ug892-vivado-design-flowsoverview/Design-Flows and instructions in our repository.
For hardware and software network simulations, please
follow the instructions in the repository on how to build and
run the simulators.
A.5 Experiment workflow
A.5.1 Hardware verification and simulation. Our code
comprises two components: custom modules integrated into
the project library and modified native Ethernet modules
with overloaded functionality. The full testbed consists of
three Xilinx Alveo U200 FPGA boards, configured as compute, memory, and switch nodes, respectively. For convenience of artifact evaluation, we provide an example of a
single board with loopback connection.
With latency metrics gathered from the hardware testbed,
we perform cycle-accurate hardware simulation to obtain a
more comprehensive evaluation of EDM’s end-to-end performance for a real application over realistic workloads.

Together, these components provide comprehensive cases
supporting the two key technical contributions of our paper:
• The implementation of host and switch network stacks
in the Ethernet PHY for remote memory access.
• The design of a centralized, fast, in-network memory
traffic scheduler in the PHY.
A.2

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Program: FPGA project and C simulator.
• Compilation: Vivado and GCC.
• Run-time environment: Vivado 2023.2 on Ubuntu 22.04.3.
• Hardware: Xilinx Alveo U200 FPGA board.
• Metrics: Latency, bandwidth utilization, and message completion time.
• How much time is needed to complete experiments
(approximately)?: For hardware synthesis and experiments,
it takes around two hours. Software network simulation
experiments should finish within one hour.
• Publicly available?: Yes. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.14377804
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: MIT.

A.5.2 Software Network simulation. The simulation
setup consists of two components: the trace generator and
the network simulator. The trace generator leverages preexisting CDF profiles of disaggregated workloads to generate
experimental traces. The network simulator incorporates
seven distinct scheduling algorithms: EDM’s in-network
scheduler and six state-of-the-art congestion and flow control mechanisms as comparative benchmarks.
Our evaluation framework encompasses four distinct experimental scenarios: one utilizing real-world traces and
three employing synthesized workloads.

A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to access. https://github.com/wegul/EDM

A.6 Evaluation and expected results
The hardware testbed component encompasses our complete
implementation of the EDM host and switch network stack,
allowing verification of the latency measurements presented
in Table 1.
The hardware simulation experiments complement the
hardware testbed with the YCSB workloads [18] running
over a key-value store application. It reproduces results in
Figure 6 and Figure 7.
For software network simulations, we provide a comprehensive automation framework consisting of scripted tools
for trace generation and experimental execution, plus Python
programs to visualize the comparative analysis to reproduce
the results in Figure 8.

A.3.2 Hardware dependencies. Xilinx Alveo U200 board.
A.3.3 Software dependencies. Vivado (validated on versions 2022.1 and 2023.2), Python>=3.9.
A.3.4

Data sets.

1. For hardware testbed experiments that focus on remote memory access latency, we use the read response
and write request message sizes of 64 B, while the read
requests are 8 B.
2. For cycle-accurate FPGA hardware simulations running a real-world application, we use YCSB workloads [18] with different read-write distributions.

391

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

References

[21] Daniel Firestone, Andrew Putnam, Sambhrama Mundkur, Derek Chiou,
Alireza Dabagh, Mike Andrewartha, Hari Angepat, Vivek Bhanu,
Adrian Caulfield, Eric Chung, Harish Kumar Chandrappa, Somesh
Chaturmohta, Matt Humphrey, Jack Lavier, Norman Lam, Fengfen
Liu, Kalin Ovtcharov, Jitu Padhye, Gautham Popuri, Shachar Raindel,
Tejas Sapre, Mark Shaw, Gabriel Silva, Madhan Sivakumar, Nisheeth
Srivastava, Anshuman Verma, Qasim Zuhair, Deepak Bansal, Doug
Burger, Kushagra Vaid, David A. Maltz, and Albert Greenberg. Azure
Accelerated Networking: SmartNICs in the Public Cloud. NSDI, 2018.
[22] Peter X Gao, Akshay Narayan, Sagar Karandikar, Joao Carreira, Sangjin
Han, Rachit Agarwal, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. Network
Requirements for Resource Disaggregation. OSDI, 2016.
[23] Peter X. Gao, Akshay Narayan, Gautam Kumar, Rachit Agarwal, Sylvia
Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. PHost: Distributed near-Optimal Datacenter Transport over Commodity Network Fabric. CoNEXT, 2015.
[24] Dan Gibson, Hema Hariharan, Eric Lance, Moray McLaren, Behnam
Montazeri, Arjun Singh, Stephen Wang, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Zhehua
Wu, Sunghwan Yoo, Raghuraman Balasubramanian, Prashant Chandra,
Michael Cutforth, Peter Cuy, David Decotigny, Rakesh Gautam, Alex
Iriza, Milo M. K. Martin, Rick Roy, Zuowei Shen, Ming Tan, Ye Tang,
Monica Wong-Chan, Joe Zbiciak, and Amin Vahdat. Aquila: A unified,
low-latency fabric for datacenter networks. NSDI, 2022.
[25] Donghyun Gouk, Miryeong Kwon, Hanyeoreum Bae, Sangwon Lee,
and Myoungsoo Jung. Memory Pooling With CXL. MICRO, 2023.
[26] Donghyun Gouk, Sangwon Lee, Miryeong Kwon, and Myoungsoo
Jung. Direct Access, High-Performance Memory Disaggregation with
{DirectCXL}. USENIX ATC 22, 2022.
[27] Juncheng Gu, Youngmoon Lee, Yiwen Zhang, Mosharaf Chowdhury,
and Kang G Shin. Efficient Memory Disaggregation with Infiniswap.
NSDI, 2017.
[28] Mark Handley, Costin Raiciu, Alexandru Agache, Andrei Voinescu,
Andrew Moore, Gianni Antichi, and Marcin Wojcik. Re-architecting
datacenter networks and stacks for low latency and high performance.
SIGCOMM, 2017.
[29] Mohamed Hassan. On the Off-chip Memory Latency of Real-Time
Systems: Is DDR DRAM Really the Best Option? https://arxiv.org/pdf/
1810.07059.pdf, 2018.
[30] Stephen Ibanez, Alex Mallery, Serhat Arslan, Theo Jepsen, Muhammad Shahbaz, Changhoon Kim, and Nick McKeown. The nanoPU: A
Nanosecond Network Stack for Datacenters. OSDI, 2021.
[31] Van Jacobson. Congestion avoidance and control. SIGCOMM, 1988.
[32] Sagar Karandikar, Howard Mao, Donggyu Kim, David Biancolin,
Alon Amid, Dayeol Lee, Nathan Pemberton, Emmanuel Amaro, Colin
Schmidt, Aditya Chopra, Qijing Huang, Kyle Kovacs, Borivoje Nikolic,
Randy Katz, Jonathan Bachrach, and Krste Asanovic. FireSim: FPGAAccelerated Cycle-Exact Scale-Out System Simulation in the Public Cloud.
ISCA, 2018.
[33] Akhilesh Kumar. The New Intel® Xeon® Processor Scalable Family
(Formerly Skylake-SP). HotChips, 2017.
[34] Leslie Lamport. The part-time parliament. ACM Transactions on
Computer Systems, 1998.
[35] Yanfang Le, Radhika Niranjan Mysore, Lalith Suresh, Gerd Zellweger,
Sujata Banerjee, Aditya Akella, and Michael M. Swift. PL2: Towards
Predictable Low Latency in Rack-Scale Networks. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2101.06537, 2021.
[36] Ki Suh Lee, Han Wang, Vishal Shrivastav, and Hakim Weatherspoon.
Globally Synchronized Time via Datacenter Networks. SIGCOMM, 2016.
[37] Ki Suh Lee, Han Wang, and Hakim Weatherspoon. PHY Covert Channels: Can you see the Idles? NSDI, 2014.
[38] Seung-seob Lee, Yanpeng Yu, Yupeng Tang, Anurag Khandelwal, Lin
Zhong, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Mind: In-Network Memory Management for Disaggregated Data Centers. SOSP, 2021.
[39] Jason Lei and Vishal Shrivastav. Seer: Enabling Future-Aware Online
Caching in Networked Systems. NSDI, 2024.

[1] Mohammad Alizadeh, Albert Greenberg, David A. Maltz, Jitendra
Padhye, Parveen Patel, Balaji Prabhakar, Sudipta Sengupta, and Murari
Sridharan. Data Center TCP (DCTCP). SIGCOMM, 2010.
[2] Mohammad Alizadeh, Abdul Kabbani, Tom Edsall, Balaji Prabhakar,
Amin Vahdat, and Masato Yasuda. Less Is More: Trading a Little Bandwidth for Ultra-Low Latency in the Data Center. NSDI, 2012.
[3] Mohammad Alizadeh, Shuang Yang, Milad Sharif, Sachin Katti, Nick
McKeown, Balaji Prabhakar, and Scott Shenker. pFabric: Minimal
Near-optimal Datacenter Transport. SIGCOMM, 2013.
[4] Emmanuel Amaro, Christopher Branner-Augmon, Zhihong Luo, Amy
Ousterhout, Marcos K Aguilera, Aurojit Panda, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and
Scott Shenker. Can far memory improve job throughput? EuroSys, 2020.
[5] Daniel Amir, Tegan Wilson, Vishal Shrivastav, Hakim Weatherspoon,
Robert Kleinberg, and Rachit Agarwal. Optimal Oblivious Reconfigurable Networks. STOC, 2022.
[6] Thomas Anderson, Susan Owicki, James Saxe, and Charles Thacker.
High Speed Switch Scheduling for Local Area Networks. TOCS, 1993.
[7] Hitesh Ballani, Paolo Costa, Raphael Behrendt, Daniel Cletheroe, Istvan
Haller, Krzysztof Jozwik, Fotini Karinou, Sophie Lange, Kai Shi, Benn
Thomsen, and Hugh Williams. Sirius: A Flat Datacenter Network with
Nanosecond Optical Switching. SIGCOMM, 2020.
[8] Deepak Bansal, Gerald DeGrace, Rishabh Tewari, Michal Zygmunt,
James Grantham, Silvano Gai, Mario Baldi, Krishna Doddapaneni,
Arun Selvarajan, Arunkumar Arumugam, Balakrishnan Raman, Avijit
Gupta, Sachin Jain, Deven Jagasia, Evan Langlais, Pranjal Srivastava,
Rishiraj Hazarika, Neeraj Motwani, Soumya Tiwari, Stewart Grant,
Ranveer Chandra, and Srikanth Kandula. Disaggregating Stateful Network Functions. NSDI 23, 2023.
[9] Daniel Bittman, Robert Soulé, Ethan L. Miller, Vishal Shrivastav, Pankaj
Mehra, Matthew Boisvert, Avi Silberschatz, and Peter Alvaro. Don’t
Let RPCs Constrain Your API. HotNets, 2021.
[10] Pat Bosshart, Glen Gibb, Hun-Seok Kim, George Varghese, Nick McKeown, Martin Izzard, Fernando Mujica, and Mark Horowitz. Forwarding
Metamorphosis: Fast Programmable Match-Action Processing in Hardware for SDN. SIGCOMM, 2013.
[11] Niv Buchbinder, Danny Segev, and Yevgeny Tkach. Online Algorithms
for Maximum Cardinality Matching with Edge Arrivals. ESA, 2017.
[12] Qizhe Cai, Mina Tahmasbi Arashloo, and Rachit Agarwal. dcPIM:
Near-optimal Proactive Datacenter Transport. SIGCOMM, 2022.
[13] Irina Calciu, M Talha Imran, Ivan Puddu, Sanidhya Kashyap, Hasan Al
Maruf, Onur Mutlu, and Aasheesh Kolli. Rethinking Software Runtimes
for Disaggregated Memory. ASPLOS, 2021.
[14] Irina Calciu, Ivan Puddu, Aasheesh Kolli, Andreas Nowatzyk, Jayneel
Gandhi, Onur Mutlu, and Pratap Subrahmanyam. Project Pberry: FPGA
Acceleration for Remote Memory. HotOS, 2019.
[15] Xinyi Chen, Liangcheng Yu, Vincent Liu, and Qizhen Zhang. Cowbird:
Freeing CPUs to Compute by Offloading the Disaggregation of Memory.
SIGCOMM, 2023.
[16] Inho Cho, Keon Jang, and Dongsu Han. Credit-Scheduled DelayBounded Congestion Control for Datacenters. SIGCOMM, 2017.
[17] Sharad Chole, Andy Fingerhut, Sha Ma, Anirudh Sivaraman, Shay Vargaftik, Alon Berger, Gal Mendelson, Mohammad Alizadeh, Shang-Tse
Chuang, Isaac Keslassy, Ariel Orda, and Tom Edsall. dRMT: Disaggregated Programmable Switching. SIGCOMM, 2017.
[18] Brian F Cooper, Adam Silberstein, Erwin Tam, Raghu Ramakrishnan,
and Russell Sears. Benchmarking cloud serving systems with YCSB.
2010.
[19] Aleksandar Dragojević, Dushyanth Narayanan, Miguel Castro, and
Orion Hodson. {FaRM}: Fast Remote Memory. NSDI, 2014.
[20] Nathan Farrington, George Porter, Sivasankar Radhakrishnan,
Hamid Hajabdolali Bazzaz, Vikram Subramanya, Yeshaiahu Fainman,
George Papen, and Amin Vahdat. Helios: a hybrid electrical/optical
switch architecture for modular data centers. SIGCOMM, 2010.

392

EDM: An Ultra-Low Latency Ethernet Fabric for Memory Disaggregation

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[40] Philip Levis, Kun Lin, and Amy Tai. A Case Against CXL Memory
Pooling. HotNets, 2023.
[41] Huaicheng Li, Daniel S Berger, Lisa Hsu, Daniel Ernst, Pantea Zardoshti, Stanko Novakovic, Monish Shah, Samir Rajadnya, Scott Lee,
Ishwar Agarwal, et al. Pond: CXL-based Memory Pooling Systems for
Cloud Platforms. ASPLOS, 2023.
[42] Yuliang Li, Rui Miao, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Yan Zhuang, Fei Feng,
Lingbo Tang, Zheng Cao, Ming Zhang, Frank Kelly, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Minlan Yu. HPCC: High Precision Congestion Control. SIGCOMM, 2019.
[43] William M. Mellette, Rajdeep Das, Yibo Guo, Rob McGuinness, Alex C.
Snoeren, and George Porter. Expanding across time to deliver bandwidth
efficiency and low latency. NSDI, 2020.
[44] William M. Mellette, Rob McGuinness, Arjun Roy, Alex Forencich,
George Papen, Alex C. Snoeren, and George Porter. RotorNet: A Scalable, Low-complexity, Optical Datacenter Network. SIGCOMM, 2017.
[45] Rui Miao, Hongyi Zeng, Changhoon Kim, Jeongkeun Lee, and Minlan
Yu. SilkRoad: Making Stateful Layer-4 Load Balancing Fast and Cheap
Using Switching ASICs. SIGCOMM, 2017.
[46] Radhika Mittal, Terry Lam, Nandita Dukkipati, Emily Blem, Hassan
Wassel, Monia Ghobadi, Amin Vahdat, Yaogong Wang, David Wetherall, and David Zats. TIMELY: RTT-based Congestion Control for the
Datacenter. SIGCOMM, 2015.
[47] Behnam Montazeri, Yilong Li, Mohammad Alizadeh, and John Ousterhout. Homa: A Receiver-Driven Low-Latency Transport Protocol Using
Network Priorities. SIGCOMM, 2018.
[48] Rolf Neugebauer, Gianni Antichi, José Fernando Zazo, Yury Audzevich,
Sergio López-Buedo, and Andrew W. Moore. Understanding PCIe
performance for end host networking. SIGCOMM, 2018.
[49] Stanko Novakovic, Alexandros Daglis, Edouard Bugnion, Babak Falsafi,
and Boris Grot. Scale-out NUMA. ASPLOS, 2014.
[50] Stanko Novakovic, Alexandros Daglis, Edouard Bugnion, Babak Falsafi,
and Boris Grot. Scale-out NUMA. ASPLOS, 2014.
[51] Jonathan Perry, Amy Ousterhout, Hari Balakrishnan, Devavrat Shah,
and Hans Fugal. Fastpass: A Centralized "Zero-queue" Datacenter Network. SIGCOMM, 2014.
[52] Andrew Putnam, Adrian M. Caulfield, Eric S. Chung, Derek Chiou,
Kypros Constantinides, John Demme, Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Jeremy Fowers, Gopi Prashanth Gopal, Jan Gray, Michael Haselman, Scott Hauck,
Stephen Heil, Amir Hormati, Joo-Young Kim, Sitaram Lanka, James
Larus, Eric Peterson, Simon Pope, Aaron Smith, Jason Thong, Phillip Yi
Xiao, and Doug Burger. A reconfigurable fabric for accelerating largescale datacenter services. ISCA, 2014.
[53] Zhenyuan Ruan, Malte Schwarzkopf, Marcos K Aguilera, and Adam
Belay. {AIFM}:High-Performance, Application-Integrated Far Memory.
OSDI, 2020.
[54] Fred Schneider. Implementing Fault-tolerant Services using the State
Machine Approach: A Tutorial. ACM Computing Surveys, 1990.
[55] Henry N. Schuh, Arvind Krishnamurthy, David Culler, Henry M. Levy,
Luigi Rizzo, Samira Khan, and Brent E. Stephens. CC-NIC: a CacheCoherent Interface to the NIC. ASPLOS, 2024.
[56] Yizhou Shan, Yutong Huang, Yilun Chen, and Yiying Zhang. LegoOS:
A Disseminated, Distributed OS for Hardware Resource Disaggregation.
OSDI, 2018.
[57] Vishal Shrivastav. Fast, Scalable, and Programmable Packet Scheduler
in Hardware. SIGCOMM, 2019.
[58] Vishal Shrivastav. Programmable Multi-Dimensional Table Filters for
Line Rate Network Functions. SIGCOMM, 2022.
[59] Vishal Shrivastav. Stateful Multi-Pipelined Programmable Switches.
SIGCOMM, 2022.
[60] Vishal Shrivastav, Ki Suh Lee, Han Wang, and Hakim Weatherspoon.
Globally Synchronized Time via Datacenter Networks. Transactions on
Networking, 2019.
[61] Vishal Shrivastav, Asaf Valadarsky, Hitesh Ballani, Paolo Costa, Ki Suh
Lee, Han Wang, Rachit Agarwal, and Hakim Weatherspoon. Shoal: A

Network Architecture for Disaggregated Racks. NSDI, 2019.
[62] David Sidler, Zeke Wang, Monica Chiosa, Amit Kulkarni, and Gustavo
Alonso. StRoM: Smart Remote Memory. EuroSys, 2020.
[63] Anirudh Sivaraman, Suvinay Subramanian, Mohammad Alizadeh,
Sharad Chole, Shang-Tse Chuang, Anurag Agrawal, Hari Balakrishnan,
Tom Edsall, Sachin Katti, and Nick McKeown. Programmable Packet
Scheduling at Line Rate. SIGCOMM, 2016.
[64] 10.1109/IEEESTD.2022.9844436. IEEE Standard for Ethernet. IEEE Std
802.3-2022 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.3-2018), 2022.
[65] https://amplab.cs.berkeley.edu/benchmark/. Berkeley Big Data Benchmark. AMP Lab, UC Berkeley, 2014.
[66] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compare-and-swap.
Compare-and-swap. Wikipedia.
[67] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfiniBand. Infiniband. Wikipedia.
[68] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priority_encoder.
Priority Encoder. Wikipedia.
[69] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDMA_over_Converged_Ethernet.
RDMA over converged Ethernet. Wikipedia.
[70] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shortest_remaining_time. Shortest Remaining Time First. Wikipedia.
[71] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Machine_(computer_
architecture). The Machine. Wikipedia.
[72] https://github.com/corundum/corundum. Corundum. GitHub.
[73] https://images.nvidia.com/content/pdf/nvswitch-technicaloverview.pdf. NVIDIA NVLink and NVSwitch Technical Overview.
NVIDIA Corporation.
[74] https://investors.broadcom.com/news-releases/news-releasedetails/broadcom-delivers-industrys-first-512-tbps-co-packagedoptics. Broadcom Delivers Industry’s First 51.2-Tbps Co-Packaged Optics
Ethernet Switch Platform for Scalable AI Systems. Broadcom.
[75] https://opencapi.org/technical/specifications/. OpenCAPI Specifications. OpenCAPI Consortium.
[76] https://www.accton.com/Technology-Brief/the-new-world-of-400gbps-ethernet/. The New World of 400 Gbps Ethernet. Accton.
[77] https://www.barefootnetworks.com. Tofino Switch. Intel.
[78] https://www.ccixconsortium.com/library/specification/. CCIX Base
Specification 1.0. CCIX Consortium Inc.
[79] https://www.computeexpresslink.org/download-the-specification.
CXL 3.0 Specification. Compute Express Link Consortium Inc.
[80] https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/opinions/intel-rack-scaledesign-just-what-is-it/. Intel Rack Scale Design: Just what is it? Intel.
[81] https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/
pdfs/literature/hb/stratix-10/s10-overview.pdf. Stratix 10 FPGA. Intel.
[82] https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/
pdfs/literature/hb/stratix-v/stx5_51001.pdf. Stratix V FPGA. Intel.
[83] https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/details/fpga/
agilex.html. Utra Path Interconnect. Intel.
[84] https://www.semianalysis.com/p/cxl-is-dead-in-the-ai-era. CXL Is
Dead In The AI Era. SemiAnalysis.
[85] https://www.synopsys.com/implementation-and-signoff/rtlsynthesis-test/dc-ultra.html. DC Ultra RTL Synthesis. Synopsys.
[86] https://www.uciexpress.org/specification. UCIe 1.0 Specification. Universal Chiplet Interconnect Express.
[87] https://www.xconn-tech.com/product. XC50256 CXL2.0/PCle5.0 switch.
XconnTech.
[88] https://www.xilinx.com/products/boards-and-kits/alveo/u200.html.
Alveo U200 Data Center Accelerator Card. AMD Xilinx.
[89] http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1bb.html. Priority-based Flow
Control. IEEE DCB. 802.1Qbb, 2011.
[90] Chenxi Wang, Haoran Ma, Shi Liu, Yuanqi Li, Zhenyuan Ruan, Khanh
Nguyen, Michael D Bond, Ravi Netravali, Miryung Kim, and Guoqing Harry Xu. Semeru: A Memory-Disaggregated Managed Runtime.
OSDI, 2020.

393

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Weigao Su and Vishal Shrivastav

[91] Han Wang, Ki Suh Lee, Erluo Li, Chiun Lin Lim, Ao Tang, and Hakim
Weatherspoon. Timing is Everything: Accurate, Minimum Overhead,
Available Bandwidth Estimation in High-Speed Wired Networks. IMC,
2014.
[92] Shu-Ting Wang and Weitao Wang. Aurelia: CXL Fabric with Tentacle.
WORDS, 2023.
[93] Adam Wierman and Bert Zwart. Is Tail-Optimal Scheduling Possible?
Operations Research, INFORMS, 2012.
[94] Qizhen Zhang, Philip A Bernstein, Daniel S Berger, and Badrish Chandramouli. Redy: Remote Dynamic Memory Cache. https://arxiv.org/

abs/2112.12946, 2021.
[95] Yibo Zhu, Haggai Eran, Daniel Firestone, Chuanxiong Guo, Marina
Lipshteyn, Yehonatan Liron, Jitendra Padhye, Shachar Raindel, Mohamad Haj Yahia, and Ming Zhang. Congestion Control for Large-Scale
RDMA Deployments. SIGCOMM, 2015.
[96] Danyang Zhuo, Monia Ghobadi, Ratul Mahajan, Klaus-Tycho Förster,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Thomas Anderson. Understanding and
Mitigating Packet Corruption in Data Center Networks. SIGCOMM,
2017.

394

