ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Abhishek Vijaya Kumar, Gianni Antichi, and Rachee Singh

GPU 2

GPU 3

GPU 4

GPU 5

GPU 6

GPU 7

GPU 8

NVLink Domain

AQUA-PROF

AQUA-LIB

GPU 1

3
1
4
2

AQUA-PLACER

Figure 2. Design of Aqa.
1. Aqa-profiler (§4). Aqa-profiler profiles the characteristics of inference workloads towards any hosted model
and the corresponding GPU memory utilization. Based on

the profiled information, Aqa-profiler decides if a GPU
has excess memory or needs more GPU memory to sustain
its inference load. We term GPUs with excess memory as
producers and those that need memory as consumers.
2. Aqa-placer (§5). Instead of relying on the chance
existence of free GPU memory nearby, we develop an algorithm, Aqa-placer, to place models in clusters to maximize
the opportunity to offload memory over the fast inter-GPU
network. Aqa-placer places models on GPUs such that
memory-bound ML models, i.e., consumers, are hosted in
proximity of memory-rich ML models, i.e., producers.
3. Aqa-lib (§6). Inference workloads can change over
time which means both the demand and supply of GPU memory during inference is elastic. This dynamic environment
makes it hard to offload inference state to a different GPU
that may require the memory back when it experiences high
load of inference queries. To deal with this, we develop Aqalib, a memory management framework that exposes a new
Aqa Tensors abstraction. Aqa Tensors are elastic — they
allow producer GPUs to transparently re-claim memory they
had exposed for offloads from memory consumer GPUs.

4

Aqa-profiler: profile memory consumption

(a) Audiogen

Throughput
Free memory
60
70
60
50
50
40
0 10 20 30
Batch Size
Memory (GB)

Memory (GB)

Throughput
Free memory
80
60
60
40
40
20
20
0 30 60 90
Batch Size

Images/min

Aqa-profiler profiles the current GPU utilization of
inference jobs with the workload they serve in the steady
state. Using this information, Aqa-profiler estimates if
the GPU is a producer or a consumer. We call ML models
on GPUs with spare memory capacity as producers and jobs
that are bottlenecked by memory capacity as consumers.

Clips/min

capacity contention. Figure 1 shows that batch processing
prompts with admission control [35, 54] queues prompts
until the current batch of prompts finishes execution on the
GPU, leading to head-of-line blocking delays. Serving can
be unresponsive even when the inference load has a single
prompt, when the GPU memory is insufficient for the model
or the KV cache and model weights together exceed the
available GPU memory [55]. Aqa ensures responsive inference under GPU memory capacity contention by reducing
preemption overhead through fast paging and implementing
a preemptive scheduler that uses fast paging.
Fast preemption with Aqa. Multi-accelerator servers
in ML clusters are allocated to inference jobs executing a
variety of ML models. The inference jobs have different GPU
compute core, memory bandwidth and memory capacity
utilization based on the model (e.g., image vs text generation). GPUs with certain inference jobs and workloads are
bottlenecked by compute with significant spare memory capacity, while other jobs are bottlenecked by memory capacity ([57],§4). We leverage this insight to decouple the memory
and compute allocation on GPUs for inference jobs. This enables us to allocate memory on GPU with spare memory to
another job bottlenecked by memory capacity on a different
GPU. This allows the memory-constrained job to access additional memory via a high-speed GPU-GPU interconnect,
such as Nvlinks, which offers an order of magnitude higher
bandwidth compared to PCIe.
Aqa addresses bursts of inference requests in cloudhosted LLMs by ensuring responsive inference (low timeto-first-token) and maintaining high throughput (low request completion time). Aqa achieves the goal of responsive and high throughput inference even under bursts by
implementing preemptive scheduling with low paging overhead (§7). Aqa’s fast preemption naturally benefits memory
constrained inference systems reliant on paging [55, 64, 69]
and also advanced caching optimizations [13, 25]. In §9, we
show that Aqa also improves the performance of these
systems in addition to achieving responsiveness. Aqa has
three main components (Figure 2):

(b) Stable diffusion

Figure 3. The plots show that when audio and image generation

models reach the plateau of their throughput, there are 10s of GBs
of free memory on an A100 80GB GPU. In fact, increasing the batchsize beyond a point results in diminishing increase in throughput.

Our experiments show that different generative ML models contend for different resources (e.g., compute vs. memory).
Specifically, vision and audio generative models have ample
memory to spare even while operating at peak inference
throughput (Figure 3). Since we need to estimate the size of
free memory at any time, Aqa-profiler measures the free
memory by increasing the batch size because the memory
consumption of the model increases with batch size. We increase the batch size of inference until the model throughput
saturates to measure the highest memory the model consumes. Since partial responses in images and audio offer

