ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Abhishek Vijaya Kumar, Gianni Antichi, and Rachee Singh

beyond the serving capacity of the allocated hardware. If the
GPU memory is fully occupied by prompts already being
inferred, any additional requests need to wait or starve until
enough space becomes available in the GPU memory. Even
with auto-scaling, prompts can starve because provisioning
new VMs incurs delays in the order of minutes [11].
Time

Iteration
Cp

A B

Cp

A B

High TTFT for D

A B C A B C A B C

Dp

B C D

A C D

Dp

A B
= Prefill

C, D arrive

= Decode

B C

Sarathi-serve
+ vLLM

B C D

AQUA

Context
switch

Figure 6. CFS enabled by Aqa during memory contention where
only 3 out of the 5 prompts can fit on a GPU at a time.

Batching vs. timesharing for scheduling inference. Recall that state-of-the-art scheduling algorithms batch chunks
of prefill computation with decoding computation of other
prompts to increase compute efficiency (§ 4). The algorithm
prioritizes decodes while batching prompts, which then leads
to starvation of a subset of prompts when multiple prompts
arrive simultaneously. In, Figure 6, C,D, arrive at the same
time but D starves till A completes execution because the
GPU’s memory can accommodate only 3 prompts at a time.
This contrasts with the behavior of operating systems that
use context-switching to manage constrained resources under load with a completely fair scheduler (CFS) [60]. Contextswitching has two steps: preemption, which saves the current
process’s state (registers, page table, etc) to DRAM, and loading, which loads the next process’s state into the CPU.
Challenge. Naively applying time-slicing from OS scheduling, which prioritizes processes that have received the least
compute time, undermines recent chunked-prefill optimizations [4]. These optimizations leverage the fact that prefill
is compute-bound while decoding is memory-bandwidthbound, allowing prefill and decoding tokens to be batched
together, effectively providing "free" decoding. Time-sharing
GPUs based on the least number of generated tokens would
only batch prefill prompts, as they have zero generated tokens, negating this benefit.
Aqa’s batch partitioning algorithm. In Aqa, we achieve
fair scheduling while preserving the benefits of chunkedprefill. Given a batch size 𝑏, we partition it into 𝑝 prefill
tokens and 𝑑 decode tokens. Our key insight to partition is
to set 𝑑 to its upper bound, corresponding to the maximum
number of prompts that fit within the GPU memory. Aqa
first fills 𝑝 with prefill prompts having the least number of
prefill tokens computed, 𝑑 with decode prompts with the
least number of tokens generated. The remaining slots in 𝑑
are allocated to prompts in 𝑝. This ensures full utilization

of GPU capacity when no prefills are present, while leveraging chunked-prefill optimization when they are. Aqa stops
filling the batch if the GPU’s memory is exhausted.
For simplicity, we measure time slices as the number of
inference iterations, as each iteration of a given batch size
takes the same time [66]. Aqa reschedules the batch every 𝑘
iterations or when a request completes, paging out prompts
that are not a part of the next batch and paging in prompts
that were not on the GPU. Figure 6 shows how Aqa fairly
allocates compute between prefill and decoding prompts,
reducing TTFT for prompt D.
Efficient context switching. Simply using Aqa Tensors
as swap space is suboptimal for two reasons. First, vLLM
stores the key-value tensors of all the prompts associated
with a layer as one tensor. So, a given token’s key and value
tensors are scattered across tensors of different layers that
are discontiguous and this leads to multiple small copies to
the offloaded Aqa Tensors. Second, Nvlinks bandwidth is
poor for small data transfers, e.g., between two A100 GPUs,
the copy bandwidth of a 4MB buffer is 50 GB/s and 64 MB
buffer is 200 GB/s. We solved this challenge by gathering
smaller tensors into a temporary tensor on the GPU and
copying that to the offloaded tensor. Similarly, Aqa-lib
copies offloaded data to a temporary tensor, and scatters it
to respective smaller tensors.
Finally, the serving engine can query Aqa-lib for the
tensor location and fall back to FCFS from CFS when tensors
are on DRAM to avoid high context switching overheads.
Other scheduling policies. Note that any policy that requires swapping can be implemented using Aqa for faster
performance compared to naively swapping to DRAM. For
example, priority fairness can be implemented with Aqa
by preempting lower priority to swap space hosted with
Aqa Tensors. Aqa-lib places these tensors on an interconnected GPU’s memory whenever possible.

8

Implementation

We implement Aqa-lib as a pip-installable Python library utilizing PyTorch [1] tensors with 500 lines of code
(LOC). The library provides functions to convert standard
CPU-based tensors to Aqa Tensors and retrieve the corresponding GPU or DRAM pointer for compute access. Internally, Aqa-lib communicates with the coordinator. We
integrate the library’s northbound interface with serving
engines, allowing users to specify GPU memory offering and
retention, managed by Aqa-profiler.
In vLLM v0.5.3, we implement CFS (§7) with 150 LOC,
alongside a CUDA kernel to efficiently gather small buffers
into larger ones for Nvlinks transfer with 200 LOC. We
introduce a new prefill caching API with unique IDs, and
both CFS and prefill caching share the same swap space for
context preemption. Aqa-lib is integrated into vLLM and
FlexGen [55] to manage swap space using Aqa Tensors
instead of PyTorch CPU tensors in less than 50 LOC. A key

