0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28
prompts
(a) TTFT on Yi-34B-200K

10
5
0 Aqua Flexgen
(b) OPT-30B

Figure 9. Figure 9a shows the TTFT of requests in order sent to Yi-

34B-200K served on 2 GPUs with tensor parallelism, where spikes
occur due to loading cached context from swap space. Figure 9b
shows the decoding throughput of OPT-30B serving on 1 GPU.
Aqa significantly improves performance of both workloads.

GPU when a request with the same prefix arrives. Figure 9a
traces 30 steady-state requests after caching.
The baseline sees TTFT spikes up to 4 seconds on each
cache hit, with subsequent requests also facing high TTFT as
they are batched with the long prompt and wait for loading
its context into the GPU. Aqa-lib minimizes the context
loading time from swap space to GPU, reducing the long
prompt’s TTFT by 3.5×. This also lowers the TTFT for subsequent requests batched with the cached prompt.
Improvements on memory constrained inference. Aqaplacer matched OPT-30B running on a single GPU with
Llama 3.1 8B. We run OPT-30B with FlexGen which is used
for offline inference scenarios [48] with low resources and
aims to improve the throughput of the system by efficiently
swapping context to the DRAM. We measure the generation
throughput of FlexGen on a sequence of prompts of length
8192 for 10 minutes and report the average throughput across
prompts. The context generated by the prompt with 8K tokens is too large to fit on the GPU after loading the model
weights and the system starts swapping to execute inference.
Figure 9b demonstrates that Aqa consistently achieves a 4×
improvement in generation throughput compared to baseline
swapping to DRAM throughout the experiment.

TPOT (ms)

Throughput
(items/minute)

Isolated
Shared
Isolated
Shared
100
32
75
24
50
16
25
8
0 SD-3 Kand Audiogen 0
Llama-8B:CFS Llama-8B:OPT
(a) Throughput

(b) TPOT

Figure 10. Figure 10a shows negligible impact on throughput
when audio and image producers share memory with consumer
workloads. The isolated bars reflect producer performance without
consumers. Figure 10b shows that memory sharing increases the
average TPOT of 2 Llama 8B instances by about 4.5 milliseconds.
What is the impact of sharing memory on producers?
We executed all the producers that shared memory in the

previous experiments without consumers to compare it with
the performance when sharing memory with a consumer.
Figure 10 shows that the impact of sharing memory is low
for producers of all modalities. The difference in throughput
is less than 5% for audiogen and non-existent for vision
generative models. We use average TPOT to measure the
performance of LLM producers since it captures the time
taken to execute one inference iteration. Figure 10b shows
that the impact of sharing memory is about 4.5 milliseconds
on TPOT. A consumer accessing the producer’s GPU memory
could lead to memory bandwidth contention, as shown in
recent work [2]. We posit that the reason for the reduction in
performance of LLMs and audiogen models is because they
rely on transformer layers that are known to be bottlenecked
by memory bandwidth of the GPU [4] and any bandwidth
contention will reduce the performance.

Isolated
50

Shared

0 Llama 70B

(a) Llama-70B TPOT

Throughput
(token/s)

3
2
1
0

Aqua

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

TPOT (ms)

TTFT (seconds)

vLLM

Average Throughput
(tokens/s)

Aqua: Network-Accelerated Memory Offloading for LLMs in Scale-Up GPU Domains

10
5
0 A1 A2 A3 A4Flexgen
(b) OPT-30B throughput

Figure 11. Figure 11a shows that the impact of sharing mem-

ory on the average TPOT over the duration of 10 minutes is 5%
on Llama 70B served on 4 GPUs using tensor parallelism on the
ShareGPT dataset. Figure 11b shows the throughput of the 4 OPT30B instances during the same duration which is consistently better
than the baseline by 4×. (A=Aqa)

What is the impact on distributed producers? Since
Aqa-placer did not match any consumer with a distributed
LLM producer, we study the impact of sharing memory over
Nvlinks on a distributed LLM’s performance in this experiment. Inference with tensor parallelism requires inter-GPU
communication via Nvlinks, which are also used when consumers access memory on the producer’s GPUs, potentially
affecting performance. To assess this, we run the Llama 3.1
70B model across 4 GPUs with tensor parallelism and 4 instances of OPT-30B on another 4 GPUs. Each GPU serving
Llama has 15 GB of free space and is a producer to one of the
OPT-30B which needs 10 GB swap space to infer on an 8K
tokens prompt. We pick OPT-30B for this experiment since
it frequently utilizes the Nvlinks to swap inference context.
We ran the experiment for 10 minutes, with Llama handling steady requests and OPT-30B generating tokens from
long prompts. Figure 11 shows that sharing memory results
in a negligible TPOT overhead on Llama is 5%. We investigated the cause for the low overhead and determined two
reasons: first, the communication size during tensor parallelism is only a few megabytes. Second, this communication
occurs between layers, leaving the interconnect idle during
computation. The small buffer sizes combined with fact that

