Aqua: Network-Accelerated Memory Offloading for LLMs in Scale-Up GPU Domains

challenge for Aqa Tensors is moving tensors from GPU
to DRAM without causing data corruption. We solve this
via the insight that inference engines have execution loop
boundaries with no GPU compute, allowing safe transfers.
We implement Aqa-placer using Gurobi [31] in 700
LOC. Aqa coordinator is a socket server with REST APIs to
offer, reclaim and allocate, deallocate memory as producers
and consumers respectively, implemented in 250 LOC.

9

Evaluation

In this section we demonstrate that Aqa’s fast preemption significantly improves responsiveness and throughput.
Experiment testbed. Our experiments utilize two separate
testbeds. The primary testbed features a server with eight
NVIDIA H100 GPUs, each with 80 GB of memory. These
GPUs are interconnected via Nvlinks and NVSwitches, providing 450 GB/s bandwidth, and connected to DRAM via PCIe
Gen5 with 50 GB/s bandwidth and the server has 1.5 TB of
RAM. The secondary testbed consists of a server with two
NVIDIA A100 GPUs, each with 80 GB of memory, directly
connected via Nvlinks with 300 GB/s bandwidth. These
GPUs connect to DRAM via PCIe Gen4 with 25 GB/s bandwidth. We use the H100 testbed for end-to-end tests and the
A100 server for micro-benchmarks to minimize costs.
9.1

Models and workloads.

Datasets. We use the parti-prompts [28] dataset to evaluate vision generative models and the default prompts from
Audiogen to evaluate audio generative models. Following
recent research [4], we use the sharegpt [35] and arxiv summarization [14] datasets to evaluate LLMs.
Distributed serving. We adopt the default policy in vLLM
of using tensor parallelism to distribute models across GPUs
during inference [35, 56] as long as the model fits within a
server and vary the number of GPUs a model is split across
to represent diverse workloads. Specifically, Llama 70B can
be deployed on 2 GPUs using tensor parallelism, but it can
also be scaled to a larger number of GPUs at higher cost
when traffic demands are consistently high. For example,
when running on the ShareGPT dataset with H100 GPUs,
increasing from 2 to 4 GPUs enables Llama 70B to handle
ten times more requests, as 4 GPUs provide ample memory
after loading the model weights. However, if an organization
expects lower sustained traffic with occasional bursts, it is
more cost-effective to use fewer GPUs and handle bursts as
they arise. In our evaluation, we study both configurations
and allow Aqa-profiler to dynamically determine when
it should function as either a producer or consumer.
Producer workloads. For audio and vision generative models, we execute the model with a batch size that reaches the
peak throughput first. For Llama 8B and 70B models, we use
the ShareGPT dataset and run it with interactive workload
SLA [4] and pick a request rate that maintains a steady queue
length, i.e., the request arrival rate is equal to the request

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

completion rate. We use the same chunk size as recent efforts
that developed chunked prefill [4] in our experiments.
Consumer workloads. We evaluate three different consumer workloads, a bursty workload that requires fair scheduling (CFS) introduced in § 7, a prefill caching workload and
a memory-constrained long prompt workload.
Fair scheduling during bursts. We use two models to evaluate the bursty workload, Yi-34B on 1 GPU and Llama-70B
on 2 GPUs distributed with tensor parallelism. We determine
the stable request rate for both the models on the ShareGPT
dataset and double the request rate for a duration of 1 minute
to create a burst. Assuming an upper bound of 1 minute to
provision new instances to handle the burst, we implement
the state-of-the-art approach proposed in recent work [59]
to handle load-balancing while auto-scaling. We track the
request arrival rate every 5 seconds and whenever the request rate increases, we trigger an auto-scale notification.
Our workload generator listens to the auto-scale notification
and simulates the behavior of the load-balancer by first waiting for a minute for the VM to spin up and then redirecting
the newly arriving requests to a dummy http server until
the number of requests in the burst has been redirected. At
this point, all the instances are back to serving requests at
the stable rate. We use a dummy server instead of a VM to
avoid allocating additional GPUs and save cost.
Prefill caching. We use Yi-34B-200K model served using
vLLM on 2 GPUs to have enough GPU memory to accommodate a large prompt and evaluate prefill caching. We pick
a large prompt with 100 thousand tokens to cache and interleave this prompt along with the ShareGPT dataset. Each
time the prompt is issued, we only modify the last 256 tokens to reuse the cached prompt to model use cases such as
question answering on a long context.
Long prompt. We use the OPT-30B model served using FlexGen [55] to evaluate long prompts that exceed the available
memory on the GPU after loading the model weights. FlexGen offloads the inference context of a prompt to the DRAM
by preempting the previous layer’s context and loading the
next layer’s context. We determine the median prompt length
from the arxiv summarization dataset to be over 7000 tokens,
so we sample prompts of length 8192 to evaluate FlexGen
since its evaluation script requires a single prompt length
parameter for the duration of the experiment.
9.2

Baselines

We evaluate the CFS workload using two baselines: the default vLLM scheduler (FCFS) and vLLM with CFS. While nonpreemptive admission control schedulers like VTC [54] prevent malicious users from monopolizing compute resources,
they still suffer from queuing delays during a surge of legitimate users. To simulate this behavior, our vLLM baseline
treats each request in a burst as a new unique user, capturing
the unresponsiveness. Thus, the vLLM lines in our graphs
also represent VTC performance.

