                 P R O T O RAIL: A R ISK - COGNIZANT I MITATION AGENT
               FOR A DAPTIVE V CPU OVERSUBSCRIPTION I N THE C LOUD



Lu Wang * 1 Mayukh Das * 2 Fangkai Yang 1 Bo Qiao 1 Hang Dong 1 Si Qin 1 Victor Ruehle 3 Chetan Bansal 4
             Eli Cortez 4 Inigo Goiri 4 Saravan Rajmohan 4 Qingwei Lin 1 Dongmei Zhang 1


                                                         A BSTRACT
     Safe optimization of operating costs is one of the holy grails of successful revenue-generating cloud systems
     and capacity/resource efficiency is a key factor in making that a reality. Among other strategies for resource
     efficiency across major cloud providers, Oversubscription is an extremely prevalent practice where more virtual
     resources are offered than actual physical capacity to minimize revenue loss against redundant capacity. While
     resources can be of any type, including compute, memory, power or network bandwidth, we highlight the scenario
     of virtual CPU (vCPU) oversubscription since vCPU cores are primarily the billable units for cloud services and
     has substantial impact on business as well as users. For a seamless cloud experience, while being cost-efficient
     for the provider, suitable policies for controlling oversubscription margins are crucial. Narrow margins lead to
     redundant expenditure on under-utilized resource capacity, and wider margins lead to under-provisioning where
     customer workloads may suffer from resource contention. Most oversubscription policies today are engineered
     either with tribal knowledge or with static heuristics about the system, which lead to catastrophic overloading or
     stranded/under-utilized resources. Smart oversubscription policies that can adapt to demand/utilization patterns
     across time and granularity to jointly optimize cost benefits and risks is a non-trivial, largely, unsolved problem.
     We address this challenge with our proposed novel Prototypical Risk-cognizant Active Imitation Learning
     (P R O T O RAIL) framework that exploits approximate symmetries in utilization patterns to learn suitable policies.
     The active knowledge-in-the-loop (KITL) module de-risks the learned policies. Our empirical investigations and
     real deployments on Microsoft’s internal (1st party) cloud service, show orders of magnitude reduction (≈≥ 90×)
     in risk and significant increase in benefits (saved stranded resources: in a range of ≈ 7 to 10%).

1    I NTRODUCTION
Oversubscription is popular and widely used practice across
the professional services (logistics, travel, cloud etc.) indus-
try. It is the scenario where a system offers more resources
or services, such as virtual compute resources, to users or
entities than its available physical capacity, assuming not all
users would simultaneously fully utilize the allocated capac-
ity. In cloud services, Virtual Machines (VMs) having some
quantum of virtual resources such as virtual cores/memory
etc. are hosted on Physical Machines (PMs). Oversub-
scription here allocates fewer resources for a VM than the
requested amount, assuming that a VM may use an extra              Figure 1. vCPU oversubscription example. After VCPU oversub.
margin beyond its allocated amount if needed (as shown in          for VM3, one more VM (VM4) can be allocated in the physical
Fig 1). As a result the platform can leverage unused physical      machine and the stranded memory is reduced (Wang et al., 2024).
capacity by packing more VMs as an effective way to avoid
    1
      Microsoft, Beijing, China 2 Microsoft, Bangalore, India      unnecessary resource wastage and maximize profits (Baset
3
 Microsoft, Cambridge, UK 4 Microsoft, Redmond, USA. Cor-          et al., 2012; Breitgand & Epstein, 2012).
respondence to: Mayukh Das <mayukhdas@microsoft.com>, Lu
Wang <wlu@microsoft.com>.                                          CPU bottlenecks are impactful in cloud (Mahapatra &
                                                                   Venkatrao, 1999) vCPUs are the sellable billing units. As
Proceedings of the 8 th MLSys Conference, Santa Clara, CA, USA,    illustrated in Fig. 1, three VMs are placed in the same node
2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).                             (PM), where we observe with unused memory, i.e., stranded
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

memory (grey box) even when CPU dimension is fully               non-convexity (Achiam et al., 2017; Paternain et al., 2019;
packed. If oversubscribed, additional VMs can be allocated       Mazyavkina et al., 2021). Also, it is not practically feasible
reducing stranded memory. Hence, we focus on vCPU                to train RL policies online on deployed systems. Imitation
oversubscription. However, designing a suitable oversub-         learning (IL), however, can solve MDP constraint prob-
scription policy is both crucial and challenging— once a         lems (Hussein et al., 2017) from offline telemetry where the
system is oversubscribed, overloading or under-utilization       expert’s policy induces the constraints by nature. In partic-
may happen (Baset et al., 2012) arbitrarily.                     ular, we propose a prototypical imitation learning method
                                                                 (P R O T O RAIL) that learns to take actions by a set of learned
Challenges: (1) Benefits vs Risk - Aggressive policy leads
                                                                 prototypes, where prototype is a data instance that is repre-
to denser VM packing and may cause arbitrary overload-
                                                                 sentative of an equivalence class of expert trajectories (Kim
ing in cloud (Williams et al., 2011),leading to higher risk
                                                                 et al., 2016; Molnar, 2020). Hence, our approach can lever-
towards user experience and revenue losses through com-
                                                                 age approximate symmetries in patterns, allowing us to
pensations (Wittman, 2014). Conservative policies result in
                                                                 learn adaptive policies for any granularity. One caveat is
redundant capacity and inefficient resource usage (wastage).
                                                                 that the utilization data is usually noisy or sparse, result-
(2) Dynamic patterns - Demand and utilization patterns
                                                                 ing in sub-optimal prototypes and policies. Facilitated by
vary across time (VMs, users, services/groups). Static poli-
                                                                 the interpretability of prototypes, we leverage efficient ac-
cies cannot adapt to such dynamic load patterns (Cortez
                                                                 tive knowledge-in-the-loop infusion to de-risk the policies
et al., 2017). Designing adaptive policies is also not trivial
                                                                 against overloading.
since forecasting just user demand pattern is not enough. (3)
Policy Granularity - Demand may vary with granularity,           Contributions and Impact: We make the following con-
i.e. at what level the oversubscription is enforced (per VM,     tributions: (1) We propose a novel prototypical imitation
subscriptions/users, or user groups).                            learning approach to solve the vCPU oversubscription ratio
                                                                 prediction problem for cloud system to maximize utilization
The problem: We address the problem of vCPU oversub-
                                                                 (COGS1 ) efficiency and minimizing risk; (2) Efficient active
scription by alleviating overloading risks while maximiz-
                                                                 knowledge-in-the-loop (KITL) training technique mitigates
ing utilization against temporally varying demand patterns
                                                                 overloading risk from systematic noise; (3) Extensive evalu-
across time and granularity. Existing research usually deals
                                                                 ations, both offline and in practice on Microsoft’s internal
with specific scenarios instead of principled generalized
                                                                 cloud, show how P R O T O RAIL learns oversubscription poli-
formalism. Some approach oversubscription in cloud plat-
                                                                 cies with ≈ 0% risk and ≈ 7 to 10% higher benefit; (4) We
forms as online constrained bin-packing problem (Baset
                                                                 also show how our P R O T O RAIL seamlessly generalizes to
et al., 2012; Breitgand & Epstein, 2012; Householder et al.,
                                                                 other domains beyond cloud services. Airline ticket over-
2014), focusing more on resource allocation rather than
                                                                 booking dataset is curated from static periodic reports of
oversubscription policy. Others propose migration strategies
                                                                 U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT).
to mitigate overload situations (Wang & Tianfield, 2018;
Li, 2019). Yet, a generalized oversubscription policy, that
addresses the above challenges is under-explored.                2     P RELIMINARY AND BACKGROUND
Oversubscription, resource allocation, scheduling, and op-       2.1   Optimal oversubscription problem
timal packing are all related concepts in resource manage-
                                                                 We formally describe optimal oversubscription problem as
ment. However, they each address different aspects of the
                                                                 identifying optimal oversubscription rate ζe∗ |0 ≤ ζe ≤ 1,
problem. Oversubscription occurs when the demand ex-
                                                                 where ζe = Ae /ℜe is the fraction of requested virtual re-
ceeds the available supply, whereas resource allocation and
                                                                 sources (ℜe ) by an entity e ∈ E (a VM, or a user) that is
scheduling deal with management and mapping of demand
                                                                 actually allocated (Ae ) by the cloud platform. We need to
to resources within a system. Optimal packing, on the other
                                                                 optimize on two competing objectives, “COGS benefit” β
hand, is an approach that seeks to minimize fragmentation.
                                                                 and “overloading risk” χ.
Proposed Solution: In this paper, we pose the adaptive
                                                                 Semantically, benefit β is a function of denser VM packing
oversubscription question as a sequential decision-making
                                                                 and reduction in total provisioned nodes due to more har-
problem with resource limits. Predicting future utilization
                                                                 vestable stranded vCPUs made available better ζ. But that
behaviors given historical observations through traditional
                                                                 cannot be computed at offline training time. We present a
supervised learning approaches is insufficient since they are
                                                                 simpler formulation tracking cost of
                                                                                                    Pphysical CPU cores wrt
unaware of the interactions between the users and the envi-
                                                                 harvested vCPUs, β({ζe }e∈E ) = e∈E (1−ζe ).ℜe ×k×C,
ronments (De Haan et al., 2019). Alternatively, traditional
                                                                 where k ∈ R is physical cores per vCPU and C is the cost
online reinforcement learning (RL) with constraints (Garcıa
& Fernández, 2015), it is challenging to optimize different        1
                                                                      Cost Of Goods Sold a well-known concept in service/product
competing objectives with convergence guarantees, due to         industry (Franklin et al., 2019)
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

of a physical core. The risk of overloading arises if ζ is
too low, causing the allocator to pack too many requests
into a node, leaving no room for scaling up in case mul-
tiple
P VMs    Ppeak simultaneously. Thus risk χ({ζe }e∈E ) =
   η∈N I(  e∈Eη Ue .k ≥ size(η)) is the sum of node over-
load indicators, where Ue is the usage rate and N is the set
of nodes. Hence, the optimization problem becomes,

   ζ ∗ = arg max β({ζe }e∈E ) + arg min χ({ζe }e∈E )       (1)
             {ζe }                     {ζe }


There is no closed form solution to this problem. Also,
ζ ∗ is not one value but adaptive values across time
based on demand patterns and granularity. We could
learn a policy π ∗ = P (ζ ∗ |usage, time, . . .) via on-
line RL. But online RL methods (value-based or pol-
icy gradient) maximize PTsome expected cumulative return                         Figure 2. P R O T O RAIL overview
maxa∼π Es∼T (s|s,a) [ t=t Rt |S = s, A = a]. In our con-
text, we cannot reliably and efficiency compute/sample the
return/reward (multi-objective combinatorial β vs χ) on-
line. We also cannot safely train RL policies online on
                                                                  tity/context. IL with prototypes allow for interpretable and
deployed live cloud. We leverage imitation learning based,
                                                                  effective oversubscription.
P R O T O RAIL, to learn the policy from offline telemetry.
                                                                  2.3   Active Knowledge-guided learning
2.2   Prototype theory and its importance
                                                                  Why? Sample sparsity or label noise (our case) result
Prototype theory emerged with the work of psychologist
                                                                  in highly sub-optimal models and hence arbitrary risk.
Eleanor Rosch (Rosch, 1973). In prototype theory, any given
                                                                  Knowledge-guided training leverage domain knowledge
concept has a real-world example that best represents it. For
                                                                  beyond data for better risk cognizance. The most generic
instance, for the concept fruits, an apple is more frequently
                                                                  formulation of knowledge is an inductive bias (πknow ) that
cited than a durian. Hence the presumed natural prototypes
                                                                  pushes sub-optimal models (distributions) learned from
are central tendencies of the categories. Prototype theory has
                                                                  noisy observations towards, possibly unknown, true dis-
been applied in machine learning (Kim et al., 2016), where
                                                                  tribution; π ∗ (·) = απdata (·) ⊕ (1 − α)πknow (·), where π ∗ is
a prototype indicates a data instance that is representative
                                                                  the optimal distribution and α is a trade-off.
of an equivalence class of samples (Molnar, 2020).
                                                                  Such knowledge may have 2 modes — (1) passive priors or
While there are many approaches to find prototypes, any
                                                                  constraints, (2) active feedback during the training which we
clustering algorithm that returns actual data points as clus-
                                                                  adopt, as it is difficult to design/compute priors/constraints
ter centers is a good approximation. Harel et al. (Harel &
                                                                  in prototypical IL. While conceptually motivated from ac-
Radinsky, 2018) uses generative model-based clustering to
                                                                  tive learning (Cohn et al., 1994), we (and other related
assign central points as prototypes. ProSeNet (Ming et al.,
                                                                  works (Neider et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2018; Deng et al.,
2019) leverages constraints to learn simple, diverse, and
                                                                  2020)) show that the knowledge we acquire is richer than
sparse prototypes with a sequence encoder which loosely
                                                                  mere data labels. Knowledge can be represented in many
inspires our work. However, to our best knowledge, lever-
                                                                  ways, such as explanations (Minton et al., 1989), preference
aging prototypes in IL is a novel area and can help achieve
                                                                  rules (Odom & Natarajan, 2015; Das et al., 2021), pseudo-
ideal oversubscription granularity and better interpretability.
                                                                  labels (Jiang et al., 2018; Goldberger & Ben-Reuven, 2017;
Why? In real cloud systems, there is no real ground truth         Patrini et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2018; Lee, 2013). We
on ideal oversubscription. Hence we exploit historical work-      represent feedback with simple voting on predictions and
load/VM telemetry as expert (training) trajectories, and CPU      prototypes making our approach efficient and interpretable.
usage as proxy labels, assuming (ζe ∝ Ue ). However, us-          We infuse such knowledge into training via loss scaling
age/demand patterns vary across granularity and impact            inspired from KCLN (Das et al., 2021). Knowledge can
policy choice. Key idea is to smartly leverage different          be elicited from either domain experts (humans) as seen in
equivalence classes of approximately symmetric vCPU us-           above mentioned literature or, more recently, from genera-
age patterns via prototypes. Oversub. policy is probabilistic     tive models such as LLMs (Du et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024;
estimate based on nearest prototype’s policy for given en-        Cao et al., 2024).
               P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

3     M ETHOD                                                           validating and refining the prototypes.
3.1   Problem Formulation
                                                                        3.3    Prototype Discovery
We formulate the oversubscription problem in Cloud as
                                                                        The prototype is defined as the representative instance τ E,k
a prototypical imitation learning problem. Since there
                                                                        selected from a class of expert trajectories. Specifically, the
there are no true labels on oversubscription rate we as-
                                                                        trajectory encoder is shared for encoding τt and τ E,k to the
sume the CPU usage as proxy and use usage trajectories
                                                                        same embedding space, i.e., pk = f (τ E,k ) and h = f (τt ).
τe∈E for training. Given input trajectory till timestamp t,
                                                                        Note that τ E,k is the full expert trajectory and we omit the
τte = (s1 , a1 , ..., st−1 , at−1 , st ), The base IL problem is
                                                                        time subscript. We consider three aspects as part of the
LIL = D(π(τte )||π(θ)) where π(θ) is the learned policy.
and π(τ e ) is the expert policy induced by training data.              objective for learning prototypes 1 , i.e., representative,
The expert policy distribution can be different at different            diversity, and interpretability.
granularities. For example, CPU usage patterns of similar               For representative aspect, we aim to learn prototypes that
distribution across different VMs/users/groups etc. or co-              can well represent a subset of trajectories with the regular-
located in the same region or serve same customer base.                 ization term Lrep . It encourages a clustering structure in the
Thus trajectories representing equivalence classes of CPU               embedding space by minimizing the L2 distance between
usage patterns with approximate symmetry can be consid-                 an encoded trajectory and its nearest prototype embedding:
ered as different prototypes. Prototypical imitation learning
aims to identify these usage prototypes, then predict ideal                            1 XK    1 X
                                                                              Lrep =                      ||pk − f (τ )||22 ,       (2)
oversubscription via referring the nearest prototypes based                            K  k=1 |Dk | τ ∈Dk
on the current context.
                                                                        where Dk indicates a subset of trajectories that could be
Definition 1 (Prototypical Imitation Learning). Formally                represented by pk .
prototypical imitation learning as a kind of IL that learns
                                                                        Now, to improve the diversity and reduce redundancy
an oversubscription policy πθ by aligning with a reference
                                                                        among prototypes, the term Ldiv penalizes the prototypes
prototype trajectories arg minpi ∈P πθ    ⇝      πpi . Each
                                             Distance                   that are close to each other:
prototype pi ∈ P intuitively represents equivalence classes
of patterns and prototypical IL learns a metric space in                                     1 XK XK
                                                                                Ldiv = − K                ||pi − pj ||22 ,          (3)
which decision-making is conditioned on the distance to the                                  C2 i=1 j=i+1
policies induced by prototypes. New prediction is computed
and explained by closest prototype trajectories.                        where K C 2 = 2!(K−2)!
                                                                                         K!
                                                                                               .

3.2   Overview of Prototypical Imitation Learning                       To give interpretability, we assign one expert trajectory in-
                                                                        stance τ E,k as one prototype via Lint . Then, each prototype
The architecture of Prototypical Risk-cognizant Active                  embedding can be explained by a real-world instance.
Imitation Learning (P R O T O RAIL) is shown in Fig 2. There
are three main components: (1) discover prototypes, where                                    1 XK
                                                                                   Lint =           ||pk − f (τ E,k )||22 ,         (4)
we classify the trajectories into K groups and learn proto-                                  K  k=1

typical representations pk ; (2) learn πt heta by aligning with
its similar prototypes at different states; (3) obtaining active        where τ E,k is the nearest expert trajectory instance to pk ,
feedback from the knowledge-in-the-loop for risk-cognizant              i.e., τ E,k = argminτ E ∈T ||pk − f (τ E )||22 and T is the set
policy reducing ↓ χ(ζ) while enhancing benefit ↑ β(ζ).                  of expert trajectories.

For input trajectory τt , the trajectory encoder f maps τt into         3.4    Imitation Learning over Prototypes
an embedding vector h = f (τt ), h ∈ Rm . The encoder
can be any sequence encoder, e.g., LSTMs or Transformers.               π(a|τt , P) is the policy layer that learns to take an action
The prototype layer p contains K prototype embeddings                   aligning with the prototypes 2 from the experts’ policy:
P = {p1 , ..., pK }, where each pk ∈ Rm have the same
length as h. This layer scores the similarity between h and              π(a|τt , P) = ϕ([sim(f (τt ), p1 ), .., sim(f (τt ), pK )]) (5)
each prototype pk . We consider L2 distance metric as the
similarity function for simplicity. With the computed simi-             where P = {p1 , ..., pK } is the set of prototypes embed-
larity vector [sim(f (τt ), p1 ), ..., sim(f (τt ), pK )], the policy   dings, ϕ is a linear layer with sigmoid activation, and
layer π computes the action with a linear layer with sigmoid            sim(f (τt ), pk ) = −∥f (τt )−pk ∥22 is the negative Euclidean
activation. In the end, an KITL module is leveraged to refine           distance measuring the similarity between the embedded
P R O T O RAIL for better interpretability and performance by           vector and the prototype embedding pk and a = ζ
                 P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

We consider prototypical imitation learning with two base
imitation learning models to learn the policy, i.e., behavior
cloning (BC) and adversarial imitation learning (AIL).
The goal of BC is to mimic the action of the expert at each
time step via supervised learning.
              X           X
LIMBC =                                     [π E (aE |τtE ) log π(a|τt , P)],
                 τ E ∈T     (sE ,aE )∼τ E
                                                                        (6)
                                                                                Figure 3. Example plot: Risk increases due to noisy prediction of
where τ   E                                     E
              is the expert’s trajectory, π is the expert policy.               oversub rate ≤ usage or COGS benefit decreases

On the other hand, the goal of AIL is to minimize the JS
divergence between the expert trajectory distribution and                       3.5     Risk-cognizance via active knowledge-in-the-loop
trajectory distribution generated by our policy.
                                                                                Sample and label sparsity and noise leads to sub-optimal
                          ρπ + ρπ E             ρπ + ρπ E                   prototype embedding, prototype selection, and policy model
  LIMAIL = DKL        ρπ ∥             + DKL ρπE ∥             ,
                               2                       2                        resulting in either high risk when predicted oversubscription
                                                               (7)
                                                                                rate goes too close or lower than actual usage or loss of
where ρπ and ρπE are discounted occupancy measures of                           COGS benefit (Fig. 3). Our efficient KITL module 3
our policy π and the expert policy π E .                                        leverages additional knowledge via active feedback to refine
                                                                                the learned noisy “policy over prototypes”. One essential
In summary, the full loss function we are minimizing is:                        aspect is that the — (i) The query framework P    must elicit
                                                                                                                                    T
  LF ull = w1 · Lrep + w2 · Ldiv + w3 · Lint + w4 · LIMloss
                                                                                relevant knowledge with minimum query budget t=1 |Qt |,
                                                          (8)                   since – a domain expert’s (cloud operator) time and effort is
                                                                                expensive and state-of-the-art LLMs also have token/access
 where LIMloss is the imitation learning loss with either BC                    budgets or efficiency concerns (ii) Appropriate infusion of
or AIL, and w1 , w2 , w3 , w4 , ∈ [0, 1] are hyper-parameters                   obtained knowledge into learning to shape policies.
to balance the weights of the three kinds of loss. We conduct
                                                                                We cannot directly minimize query budget while expecting
grid-search to determine the value of these hyper-parameters
                                                                                effective knowledge infusion. We optimize the query sched-
(shown in Appendix).
                                                                                ule instead. We implicitly get most relevant knowledge from
                                                                                a knowledge source κ with minimum feedback calls. κ
3.4.1    Reinterpretation as a Quadratic Model
                                                                                can be a domain expert with rich understanding of cloud
The policy π is equivalent to a quadratic model with particu-                   resources and/or LLMs which are effective in reasoning
lar parameterization. By plugging in the similarity function,                   about generic temporal patterns. Active feedback can be of
Equation 5 can be re-written as,                                                two forms: (1) feedback about the quality of prototypes -
                                                                                embedding, alignment and diversity, (2) feedback about the
   π = −b1 ∥f (τt ) − p1 ∥22 − ... − bK ∥f (τt ) − pK ∥22              (9)      risk of predicted actions.

where bk , k = 1, ..., K are the values of the linear neurons                   3.5.1    Query Framework (active knowledge elicitation):
in the fully connected layer. By checking each term in π,
we can see its linear form:                                                     Posing focused queries at relevant points to κ is essential
                                                                                for getting useful and relevant knowledge. In a traditional
−bk ∥f (τt ) − pk ∥22 = −bk f (τt )T f (τt ) + 2bk pTk f (τt ) − bk pTk pk      active learning setting, just prediction/label uncertainty is a
                                                                      (10)
                                                                                sufficient heuristic to identify relevant query points. How-
 where the first term is a quadratic term with regard to
                                                                                ever, in our context, we need richer feedback on both rel-
f (τt ), the second term can be treated as wkT f (τt ) where
                                                                                evant prototypes and output actions. Thus queries at step
wk = 2bk pk and the final term can be treated as a constant
                                                                                t is a set of tuples Qt = {⟨pqt , aqt ⟩|pqt ∈ Pqt , aqt ∈ Aqt }
term with regard to f (τt ).
                                                                                that comprises a set of prototypes embeddings Pqt ⊆ P
Starting from the above observation, we can treat the action                    and predicted action(s) Aq(t) that need feedback. Q(t) = ∅
as a summation of K quadratic functions with the same                           signifies there is no query at that step. Now Pqt = Pµ ∩ Pd
sign in quadratic coefficients with regard to f (τt ), which                    where Pµ is defined as the set of uncertain prototypes,
means the relationship between the action and f (τt ) can be
decomposed to at most two pieces and within each piece                                     Pµ = {pk ∈ P|µ(pk ) ≥ Up },
the relationship is monotonic. This observation makes our
learned policy easier to interpret.                                                        µ(pk ) = H(P (||f (τ ) − pk ||22 )), τ ∈ Dk
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

where Up is the uncertainty threshold and uncertainty is the      function of P R O T O RAIL in Equation 8 as,
prototype cluster entropy H via the distribution P (·) induced
over L2 distances. Pd comprises prototype embeddings with          L′F ull =w1 · Lrep × Φ(pk ) + w2 · Ldiv × Φ(pi , pj )
‘top-N’ average distance of the form,                                       +w3 · Lint × Φ(pk ) + w4 · LIMloss × Φ(a), (11)
                 
                      1 X
                                                                 where operator × takes effect on related prototypes/actions
Pd = arg max                     ||f (τ ) − pk ||22 , |p| = N     when computing loss. Advice potentials upscale or down-
           p⊂P       |Dk | τ ∈Dk
                                                                  scale the relevant loss components as per cumulative feed-
                                                                  back and adaptively control their amplitude, appropriately
where p |= pk is the top-N set. Now, aqt is identified via        navigating the loss landscape towards de-risked models.
both prediction uncertainty µ(aqt ) = H(π(a|τt , P)) ≥ Ua
(Ua is the action uncertainty threshold), and oversubscrip-       Impact of active knowledge-in-the-loop. Active KITL
tion risk which indicates if output action is less than the
expert action a < aE . Note that lower oversubscription ac-
tion/rate means higher risk (cf. Section Domains(Datasets)).
   This query formulation is aligned with the interpretable
   quadratic form of policy (sec. 3.4.1). The square term in
   trajectory embeddings (Eqn. 10) may lead to higher risk        Figure 4. Zoomed portions in Fig 3 after active KITL refinement.
                                                                  We get de-risked (≈ 0) policy [left] w/ increased benefit [right]
   from label noise requiring action feedback. Whereas,
   feedback on prototypes pk essentially controls the coeffi-     softly guides the selection and learning of prototypes that
   cient of the second term 2bk pTk f (τt ).                      represent diverse oversubscription policies (Figure 2) lever-
                                                                  aging κ (humans or generative AI). Intuitively, prototypes
                                                                  project decision space (actual ζ) into a lower dimensional
3.5.2   Feedback representation:
                                                                  manifold. So, feedback over prototype quality and diversity
Given Qt , κ can provide feedback on prototype quality            as well as actions gives a much richer knowledge to strongly
and membership/diversity or on action predictions. Feed-          de-risk, χ({ζe }) ↓, policies (Fig 4). Intelligent query sched-
back on prototype quality at step t for a prototype embed-        ule elicits active feedback on prototypes or predicted actions
ding pj is an up/down vote (F(pk |t) =↑ / ↓= +1/ − 1).            that need more information/help
                                                                                            PT       (knowing-what-it-knows),
Then we usePt cumulative feedback (over previous iterations)      thus minimizing budget t=1 |Qt | implicitly.
F(pk ) = t′ =1 F(pk |t′ ). We obtain action feedback F(a)
in a similar fashion. Feedback on prototype diversity is          4     E XPERIMENTS
complicated. For a given pair pi , pj , expert may choose to
up/down-vote the pair or merge pi , pj or split them further.     We empirically evaluate our method on virtual CPU over-
(1) If the prototypes are merged,L    it gets the mean of the     subscription scenario in Cloud Sytstem cloud platform. Ad-
embedding vectors of p⃗k ← 12 (⃗   pi p⃗j ), (2) if a prototype   ditionally, to highlight the generality of P R O T O RAIL we
pk is split, the new prototype is initialized with embedding      also evaluate on a novel airline ticket overbooking domain
f (τ ) : maxτ ∈Dk ||pk − f (τ )||22 and retrained.                described later. We collect real data from these domains
                                                                  and propose respective simulators for evaluation that are
3.5.3   Prototype/policy refinement:                              described next.
In our context it is difficult to design either inductive bias
                                                                  4.1     Domain (Data)
distribution or proper constraints from feedback. So we
allow the feedback to control and scale the loss via exponen-     4.1.1     Primary: vCPU Oversub. in Internal Cloud.
tial ‘advice potential gates’ (cf. K-CLN (Das et al., 2021)).
Advice potentials selectively alter the loss such that training   We evaluate with real data (de-identified) from cloud plat-
moves in the direction that is expected to produce better         form for internal users, i.e., owners of Microsoft’s services
model parameters.                                                 and applications. We collect two-week data of VM features,
                                                                  including the usage of vCPU, memory, and network, that be-
Definition 2 (Advice potential gate Φ). An advice poten-          long to 30 randomly sampled services. As the vCPU usage
tial gate is a product term of an exponential form Φ(x) =         has a lot of fine-grained variances, we take the peak usage
e−G(F(x)) where −∞ ≤ F ≤ +∞ is the cumulative feed-               in the one-hour bucket as the representative data point. Note
back. G scales the unbounded (cumulative) F to [−1, +1]           that in Figure 1, VMs are allocated onto nodes, and VMs
                                                                  from different services can be collocated in the same node.
With the available feedback over a prototype (F(pk )), action     Then, we propose a simplified allocation simulator that al-
(F(a)) or between prototypes (F(pi , pj )) we modify the loss     locates VMs via Best-Fit allocation policy (Hadary et al.,
                   P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

2020). VMs are allocated after vCPU oversubscription. For            Other hyperparameters are inherited from the base proto-
more details refer to Appendix B.2.                                  typical IL module. KITL experiments on vCPU domain
                                                                     has been performed with a batch size = 128, which
4.1.2        Other: Airline Overbooking                              also the default in base protoypical IL. In case of airplane
                                                                     ticket overbooking, we performed KITL experiments with
Even though vCPU oversubscription in cloud is the main
                                                                     batch size = {32, 64, 128}, all of them giving us the
focus, our method generalizes to any oversubscription prob-
                                                                     same results that have been reported in the paper. Base IL
lem in other domains. We demonstrate that with airline
                                                                     uses are batch size of 1 due to the way the training loop has
overbooking. We collect airline passengers’ data from the
                                                                     been designed for this domain, however in KITL batch size
overbooking reports of the U.S. Department of Transporta-
                                                                     of 1 does not allow proper prototype uncertainty computa-
tion (DOT). The dataset covers overbooking information
                                                                     tions so we experimented with batch sizes > 1 and we made
of 32 airline companies in the U.S. from 1998 to 2021 2 ,
                                                                     sure the performance is not affected. Another important
reported quarterly and train GBDT emulator (further details
                                                                     aspect is the number of epochs/iterations are same as default
in Appendix B.2).
                                                                     values in based code IL (e.g. 300 in vCPU experiments).
                                                                     However, if a split or merge feedback is given and the
4.2        Experiment Setting                                        prototype structure is altered, we introduce 30 extra training
State, Action, Reward In our vCPU oversubscription                   iterations after such feedback.
problem, the state st consists of the feature of the historical      Choice of knowledge source κ . We primarily leverage
CPU usage rate, users’ memory, CPU, and network requests             human domain experts (cloud operators, developers, and pro-
qt for each VM, Nodes’ capacity and etc. At time step t, the         visioning specialists) as κ for active feedback in de-risking
action at ∈ [0, 1] indicates the oversubscriptio rate which          policy learning in vCPU oversubscription. The choice of
indicates we will allocate a VM with at ∗ qt resources. The          human experts over LLMs is motivated by – (1) LLMs are
reward rt = −ht + mt , where ht indicates the number of              computationally heavy to be used for active feedback (2) As
hot nodes and mt indicates the number of saved vCPUs or              shown later with additional studies that zero-shot (non fine-
remain Core. In the flight tickets oversubscription problem,         tuned) LLMs cannot provide better feedback than human
the state st indicates the historical sold tickets, the number       experts. (3) Compliant LLMs that are needed to experiment
of onboarding customers, the number of seats et in the air-          on deployed internal cloud come with token budgets. Thus
plane. The action at ∈ [0, 1] indicates the oversubscription         designing proper prompts that represent the current proto-
rate. The reward function rt = −ct + ot , where ct indicates         types, predictions, queries to get policy or prototype level
the compensation cost and ot indicates the profits. In sum-          feedback is difficult since off-the-shelf LLMs are not good
mary, the state space is factored with a hybrid feature vector,      at symbolic/logical reasoning yet. We do show some studies
including temporal features. The action/decision space is            with LLMs as the knowledge/feedback source.
continuous, i.e., the oversubscription level. This makes our
problem complex to be solved in a straightforward behavior           4.3   Experimental Settings
cloning way. Instead, P R O T O RAIL embeds into a latent
space of equivalence prototypes and exploiting approximate           We evaluate our approach on the vCPU oversubscription
symmetries in the trajectory patterns.                               as well as the ticket overbooking domains, focusing on the
                                                                     interpretability and effectiveness from three aspects: (1)
                                                                     learned prototypes visualization: We visualize prototypes
Configuration settings of KITL: Some of the settings                 to analyze the policy learned by our method. (2) Task in-
of the KITL module as follows, use kitl toggles the                  ference. We show how P R O T O RAIL learns to compose the
human-in-the-loop feedback system, which is set to True in           prototypical options to solve both continuous and discrete
experiments. FREQUENCY parameter in the feedback sub-                control tasks. (3) The performance of P R O T O RAIL in these
module of P R O T O RAIL allows for additional control on the        tasks. In particular, we outline two evaluation metrics for
frequency of queries to the human if needed, which defaults          vCPU oversubscription task based on pracitcal behavior, i.e.,
to 10 iterations. It does not necessarily mean that a query          hot node and remain core. Specifically, a node hosts several
will always be generated at every 10 iterations. Queries             VMs (Appendix A) and reserves 15% resources. If the node
are subject to the query generation framework (sec. 3.5.1).          CPU utilization is higher than 85%, it is a hot node (Qiao
However, if this parameter is set to 10 and if ≥ 2 queries are       et al., 2021) which diminishes the performance of hosted
generated between consecutive 10 iterations then extras will         services (risk). Remain core as the other metric measures
be skipped allowing stricter budgeting. Uncertainty                  the benefits, defined as the remaining cores that could be
Threshold T r, (defaulted to 0.8) in experiments based               potentially used by additional VMs after oversubscription
on empirical observation.                                            (benefit). Adapting to the flight ticket overbooking, com-
      2
          https://www.bts.gov/denied-confirmed-space                 pensation cost refers to the monetary compensations for
                   P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

                                                                               at 95% confidence level are smaller than 0.05. We fur-
Table 1. Results of different learning strategies on vCPU oversub-
                                                                               ther observe that: (1) DDPG (RL) fails in both scenarios
scription and generalization to flight tickets overbooking.
                             vCPU Oversubscription          Flight Tickets
                                                                               as it is hard to optimize two competing objectives simul-
 Approach
                         Hot Node/Risk↓ Core (Benefit)↑   Cost/Risk↓ Profit↑
                                                                               taneously in standard RL. (2) The heuristic policies, i.e.,
 Grid-search                   0%            7450            0M         0M
                                                                               Grid-search and Moving Average, show robust performance
 Moving Average              1.39%           7628          0.96M       6.79M   on vCPU oversubscription. But Grid-search fails on airline
 DDPG                        1.47%           5030          12.37M     2.35M    overbooking due to the high risk of that problem, i.e., the
 Behavior Cloning            1.19%           7870          1.47M       7.21M
 GAIL                         1.2%           6980          2.74M       4.56M   ticket sales are highly dynamic, and a static oversubscrip-
 Dagger (20 time steps)      0.96%           7938          0.47M       6.95M   tion rate fails to adapt to different situations. (3) BC beats
 LSTM                        1.27%           7749          1.82M       4.98M
 Coop. Multi-Agent RL        0.89%           7897          0.59M       8.17M   GAIL, possibly because BC has better sample efficiency
 P R O T O RAIL (w/o KITL)     0%            8153          0.31M       8.79M   and, in oversubscription scenarios, training samples are lim-
 P R O T O RAIL                0%            8161          0.14M      13.65M
                                                                               ited. Furthermore, the human-guided approach (Dagger)
                                                                               shows the second-best performance, demonstrating the ben-
                                                                               efits of human guidance in this domain. We set 20 steps of
offloaded passengers (risk), and profit refers to the extra                    human guidance in Dagger, which is fair enough because it
revenues gained by overbooking (benefit).                                      accounts for almost 1/6 of the trajectory length on average.
Fewer hot nodes or lower compensation costs (χ) with                           Also, in our model, the number of queries to humans in
more remain cores/ more profits (β) on vCPU and airline                        KITL is much smaller than 20 (e.g., 6 queries on average
oversubscription resp., (shown in Table 1) highlight how                       in the vCPU experiments and 8 queries on average in the
P R O T O RAIL outperforms baselines. Our detailed ablation                    Air Ticketing experiments). (4) Sequential methods such as
studies in section 4.5 on the learned prototypes and policies                  LSTM models fail to do anything remarkable, and, in fact,
as well as the KITL module highlight how, (1) learned pro-                     the risks are quite high with no improvement in benefits.
totypes are interpretable representatives of an equivalence                    Multi-agent RL does try to minimize the risk as far as possi-
classes of trajectories and (2) efficient KITL refinement                      ble, but with no improvement in benefits. However, that is
leads to de-risked policies.                                                   not even at par with P R O T O RAIL. (5) P R O T O RAIL outper-
                                                                               forms all, both with and without KITL, as it captures differ-
Additional studies on (1) hyper-parameter tuning, such as                      ent classes of patterns via learning a set of prototypes, and
evaluations against a discretized sweep over the number                        KITL refinement of such classes further improves benefit
of prototypes/options, (2) pressure tests on reduced “hot-                     (Core/Profit) and mitigates risk (Hot node/Cost). Although
node ratio level/threshold as well as (3) more details on the                  grid-search, the most conservative policy, is at par in terms
datasets are presented in Appendix3 A.1, A.2 & B.2.                            of risk mitigation, P R O T O RAIL achieves both the least risk
                                                                               and highest benefit in both domains.
4.4        Comparisons against SOTA Baselines
Baselines: We compared three baselines, (1) Heuristic                          4.5     Additional Studies
policy: Grid-search, which searches for the overall over-                      4.5.1    Analysis of the Learned Prototypes:
subscription rate to improve the benefits by reducing the
costs/risk. Moving average, which averages the historical                      We learn 3 and 4 prototypes in vCPU oversubscription and
usage rate as the current time step’s oversubscription action.                 airline overbooking, respectively. P R O T O RAIL learns these
(2) Imitation learning: BC (Pomerleau, 1991), GAIL (Ho                         prototypes and represents them via finding the nearest tra-
& Ermon, 2016) and human-guided IL such as Dagger (with                        jectories. In Figure 5(a), different sub-figures show the
20 steps of human guidance). (3) Reinforcement learn-                          trajectories in different prototype clusters. The prototype
ing: DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016) for continuous action                       embedding is highlighted, and the trajectories are in trans-
space. We also compare against two recent, closely re-                         parent color. We analyze the interpretability of the policy via
lated frameworks for VM provisioning, namely, (4) LSTMs:                       the learned prototypes: prototypes with hourly patterns are
ScroogeVM (Jacquet et al., 2024) which uses LSTM-driven                        email/work-related services (P 0), non-user-facing services
supervised learning of usage patterns, and (5) Coop. Multi-                    that do not show temporal patterns (P 1), and social me-
agent RL: Cooperative MARL framework (Sheng et al.,                            dia/gaming services (P 2). This demonstrates the capability
2023) for optimizing oversub. strategies, treating each VM                     of P R O T O RAIL in learning interpretable prototypes.
as an agent with cooperative updates.
                                                                               As for airplane tickets (Figure 5(b)), P R O T O RAIL learns
Results: We run five seeds to conduct Wilcoxon signed-                         4 prototypes with different trends. P 0 indicates policies
rank tests to check the statistical significance of the results.               within a stable constant range. P 1 indicates continuously in-
It shows that all the p-values of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests                   creasing levels with occasional drops. P 2 indicates policies
      3
                                                                               that are sensitive to the environment and quickly increase
          All Appendices at https://aka.ms/protorail
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

                                                                queries, at only certain stages, to actively get feedback,
                                                                as shown below. Note that this is one particular example
                                                                during one training run. A query can vary in “what” is
                                                                being asked about and “when” during the training process is
                                                                the query fired, based on how earlier queries were answered.

                                                                   STEP 110; Query: P=[5, 1]=[0.9904377
                                                                   1.0770873] seem unstable. Please
                                                                   suggest: (1=good, 0=none, -1=bad OR
                                                                   "split ⟨prototype#⟩").
                                                                   $ input: 1 = -1
                                                                   STEP 240; Following prototype pairs seem
           (a) Prototypes in vCPUs oversubscription                redundant [(4,1), (2,0), (2,5)]. Wish to
                                                                   merge any (merge ⟨prototype#⟩)?
                                                                   $ input: merge 4 1

                                                                It automatically identifies P 5/P 1 as problematic and P4
                                                                as redundant (symmetric with P1); probes about possible
                                                                merging. Feedback on predicted actions with overloading
                                                                risk queried and obtained similarly. In our experiments, the
                                                                total number of queries required to reach stable performance
                                                                was ≤ 10 showing active feedback efficiency. The feedback
                                                                is then used to jointly refine both the prototype member-
                                                                ships and the embedding function. Figure 5(a)/5(b) shows
                                                                how # prototypes have reduced to 3 and 4 post-refinement.
                                                                Additionally, the queries may be sensitive to hyperparam-
                                                                eters such as thresholds(Up & Ua ). So we performed a
                                                                grid search and observed that any threshold in a range of
                                                                (0.5, 0.75) led to a stable performance on average. Reported
         (b) Prototypes in airplane tickets overbooking
                                                                results are with 0.55 as thresholds.
Figure 5. Learned prototypes vizualized on top of equivalence
                                                                4.5.3   LLMs as knowledge source κ
classes of usage patterns they represent
                                                                “Cost of domain experts” is common concern for human-
                                                                knowledge guided learning and so, LLMs could prove to be
                                                                good alternative knowledge source κ . However the cost is
action value. P 3 indicates a smooth increase over time.
                                                                a holistic measure of the difference between β and monetary
Limitation: Airline ticket data does not show a clear pattern   value of expert’s time, which is impossible to track. A
due to demand drop in COVID-19 (Amankwah-Amoah,                 practical measure is query budget. Our analysis shows a
2021) and change in the distribution over booking patterns.     minimal number of queries (6-8), significantly lower than
                                                                other methods, suggesting that the expert’s cost is offset by
4.5.2   Analysis of active feedback:                            substantial benefits and risk reductions.
As Table 1 illustrates, KITL module further de-risks (and       But we have also analyzed if LLMs are reasonable κ for
enhances benefits) policies with minimal queries to the         policy and prototype refinement. Preliminary studies (ta-
human by, (1) Querying only at relevant stages and (2)          ble 2) indicate LLMs offer promising results in terms of
Effective refinement. In vCPU domain, we initialize with        clustering accuracy and response speed, yet require fur-
6 prototypes, as per prior insights, which may do well          ther fine-tuning and prompt engineering to fully leverage
during early stages of training. However, once the learning     their potential. Note that clustering accuracy as a metric
plateaus we observe, (1) for prototype P 1 cluster, the         has a certain amount of ambiguity. There exists cluster
predicted oversubscription rate remains significantly higher    quality measures Davies-Bouldin index that quantify in-
than usage (2) in P 5, predicted oversubscription is less       tra and inter cluster densities together. However, such
than usage, an overloading risk (3) P 4 has almost no           measures did not prove useful in our case because the
services in the cluster, hence redundant. P R O T O RAIL        notion of usage prototype quality needs to be domain-
automatically detects such nuances and poses targeted           aware. Thus, we use expert evaluations to measure ac-
                           P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

                                                                               The observation was made from one of services over a
Table 2. Perf. Comparison between Human Experts and LLMs
         Metric                    Human     LLM                               two-week period. This service has been deployed in ap-
         Accuracy in Clustering ↑    98%     87%                               proximately 300 clusters. Since these are real workloads,
         Answers per Second ↑        0.35     0.57                             although the usage rate telemetry exhibit patterns it has a
         Prototype Restructuring ↑   30%     21%                               lot of sample noise as well. Appendix B.1 discusses more
         Risk Mitigation ↑          100%     46%                               details about usage patterns.
         Overhead Cost ↓             CH     CLLM
                                                                               The results are shown in Figure 6. The y-axis shows the
                                                                               cumulative number of hot nodes during the test time at dif-
curacy here. We use an open source LLM, Llama-3.1-                             ferent hot thresholds (45%, 55%, 65%, and 75%). Density
70B (Meta, 2024), in zero-shot fashion without any task-                                                                   usedCP U
                                                                               is the average node density, calculated as totalCP  U , which
specific fine-tuning. The prompts were designed but com-                       corresponds to the remaining core capacity. Lesser hot
bining usage telemetry clusters, prototypes or predictions                     nodes and larger densities indicate a more effective over-
and queries. where CH (Human Cost) would be calculated                         subscription policy. We observe that (1) our method results
as [Query budget × Expert time/query × $/unit time ] and                       in fewer hot nodes and a larger node density. The risk-
CLLM (LLM Cost) as [Hosting $ + ((Compute $/token +                            congizant policy helps to quickly adjust the policy when hot
API $/token ) × tokens/query ) × Query budget].                                nodes are detected. (2) we see that a larger node density
                                                                               does not necessarily mean more hot nodes. With the right
These findings underscore the continued value of human
                                                                               oversubscription rate and risk-cognizant mechanism, we
input in risk-cognizant training, while also highlighting
                                                                               can effectively coordinate VMs over the long term. This
the potential of integrating LLMs as low-latency low-cost
                                                                               indicates significant potential for optimizing the oversub-
knowledge sources complementing domain experts. Also
                                                                               scription policy. In fact, there are no hot nodes when the
finetuned LLM on oversubscription domain could do a better
                                                                               threshold is set to 85%, and less than 10% of clusters have
job than querying zero-shot ones. Further experimentation
                                                                               a usage rate above 75%.
with more advanced API based models like GPT4-o series or
task-specific tuned versions of the models is an immediate                     Table 3 also abstracts our VM-level benefits and risk obser-
future work.                                                                   vations on our internal deployment, where “VMs w/ β” are
                                                                               VMs which show ore than 1K vCore savings, and “VMs at
5        A PPLICATION IN P RACTICE                                             Risk” are VMs running on hot nodes, BRR is the Benefit
                                                                               to Risk Ratio. This result here is computed from two-week
The vCPU oversubscription policy learned by P R O T O RAIL                     long observations on the clusters of only 2 regions and
was successfully deployed in several scenarios (ser-                           not all 300 clusters. In the approaches “Manual” indicates
vices/applications/features) within Microsoft’s internal                       manually decided oversubscription, “Heuristics” indicate
cloud services, but with limited blast radius. Our policy                      statistical non-adaptive prediction model based on collected
improves vCPU utilization by 9.4% and maintains a 0%                           heuristics. We see that P R O T O RAIL has the best BRR.
hot node rate. The following case study demonstrate the
effectiveness on real workloads.
                                                                                   Table 3. Observations from deployment on internal cloud
                                                                                   Method           MSE ↓   VMs w/ β ↑   VMs at Risk ↓   BRR ↑
5.1        Case Study                                                              Manual           –NA–      109            14           7.79
                                                                                   Heuristics       0.065     3502           185         18.95
                                                                                   P R O T O RAIL   0.042     3542           113         31.34
                                                      Our Method    Baseline
             200
      45%




                  0
             100                                                               6    R ELATED W ORK
      55%




                  0
                  50                                                           Guided imitation learning. Learning decision-making policy
       65%




                  0                                                            can be challenging in the presence of (1) “systematic noise”
                  20
    Density 75%




                                                                               which include sample/feedback sparsity/noise, delayed sig-
               0
            0.58                                                               nals (Rauber et al., 2021), cognitive bias, sub-optimal tra-
            0.55                                                               jectories, etc.),
                       0      20      40         60          80    100
                                           Time Step                           Pure data-driven learning can be risky. Even in offline
                                                                               training, such as IL, inverse RL, or offline RL, trajecto-
                               Figure 6. A/B test Results                      ries could be noisy and catastrophic failure can occur in
We illustrate comparison between our policy and strongest                      out-of-distribution cases. Knwoledge-guided IL is an active
baseline, behavior cloning on Microsoft’s internal cloud.                      area of research. Some approaches exploit prior knowl-
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

edge (Syed & Schapire, 2007; Kunapuli et al., 2013), some         knowledge about characteristics of workloads (application
design constraints based on domain knowledge (Eppner              level metrics) running or hosted on these VMs for even
et al., 2009; Perico et al., 2019; Kim & Park, 2018) or use       better decision making. Finally a holistic KITL framework
reward-shaping functions (Judah et al., 2014) and some use        that can leverage both LLMs and domain experts together
statistical models as priors (Englert et al., 2013). Brantley     organically is of extreme interest to us.
et al. (Brantley et al., 2020) propose an active learning form
of IL with imperfect human guidance and is the closest in         R EFERENCES
spirit to our formulation. Guided Behavior Cloning, DAG-
GER, and HgDAGGER (Sasaki & Yamashina, 2021; Ross                 Achiam, J., Held, D., Tamar, A., and Abbeel, P. Constrained
& Bagnell, 2010; Kelly et al., 2019) are some popular in-           policy optimization. In International conference on ma-
teractive human-in-the-loop IL frameworks; however, their           chine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
feedback elicitation is naive, inefficient and not suitable for
rich multi-level feedback.                                        Amankwah-Amoah, J. Covid-19 pandemic and innovation
                                                                   activities in the global airline industry: A review. Envi-
Interpretable Modeling. Interpretable modeling mainly falls        ronment International, 156:106719, 2021.
into two ways (Molnar, 2020): (1) intrinsic explanation
which transparentizes the model by restricting the complex-       Baset, S. A., Wang, L., and Tang, C. Towards an understand-
ity, e.g., decision tree or case-based model (Li et al., 2018;      ing of oversubscription in cloud. In 2nd USENIX Work-
Ming et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2016), (2) post-hoc explana-         shop on Hot Topics in Management of Internet, Cloud,
tion which is achieved by analyzing the model after training        and Enterprise Networks and Services (Hot-ICE 12),
                                                                    2012.
 (Mott et al., 2019), distilling a black-box policy into a
simple structure (Verma et al., 2018). A set of post-hoc          Brantley, K., Sharaf, A., and Daumé III, H. Active imitation
imitation learning approaches were proposed for generat-            learning with noisy guidance. In Proceedings of the 58th
ing meaningful policy. However, the intrinsic explanation           Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
model is sometimes desirable since post-hoc explanations            Linguistics, pp. 2093–2105, 2020.
usually do not fit the original model precisely (Rudin, 2019).
Prototype learning (Newell et al., 1972; Cohen et al., 1996;      Breitgand, D. and Epstein, A. Improving consolidation
Kolodner, 1992) which draws conclusions for new inputs by           of virtual machines with risk-aware bandwidth oversub-
comparing them with a few exemplar prototype belongs to             scription in compute clouds. In 2012 Proceedings IEEE
the intrinsic explanation method.                                   INFOCOM, pp. 2861–2865. IEEE, 2012.

7    C ONCLUSION                                                  Brown, D. S., Cui, Y., and Niekum, S. Risk-aware active
                                                                    inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of The
We presented our novel prototypical imitation learning              2nd Conference on Robot Learning, 2018.
framework with active knowledge-guided refinement (lever-
aging human domain experts) that addresses a critical             Cao, M., Shu, L., Yu, L., Zhu, Y., Wichers, N., Liu, Y.,
decision-making problem of adaptive oversubscription with           and Meng, L. Drlc: Reinforcement learning with dense
competing objectives of efficient capacity utilization with         rewards from llm critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07382,
minimal risk. We show via extensive and ablation stud-              2024.
ies on real Microsoft’s internal could service how learned
prototypes discover implicitly interpretable classes approxi-     Cohen, M. S., Freeman, J. T., and Wolf, S. Metarecog-
mately symmetric demand patterns. This results in effective         nition in time-stressed decision making: Recognizing,
oversubscription ratio at any granularity, i.e. VMs, services       critiquing, and correcting. Human Factors, 38(2):206–
or any other grouping. Efficient active KITL refinement of          219, 1996.
prototypes and actions substantially de-risks policies with
                                                                  Cohn, D., Atlas, L., and Ladner, R. Improving generaliza-
enhanced COGS benefit. Through extensive empirical evalu-
                                                                    tion with active learning. Machine learning, 15:201–221,
ation and case studies we have exhibited how our framework
                                                                   1994.
is extremely effective on cloud platform and can be general-
ized seamlessly to other oversubscription domains as well.        Cortez, E., Bonde, A., Muzio, A., Russinovich, M., Fon-
Our studies also show how LLMs are promising in comple-             toura, M., and Bianchini, R. Resource central: Un-
ment to domain experts but needs more investigation.                derstanding and predicting workloads for improved re-
In future, we plan to extend P R O T O RAIL to other provision-     source management in large cloud platforms. In SOSP.
ing problems with similar properties. We also plan to infuse        Association for Computing Machinery, 2017. ISBN
                                                                    9781450350853. doi: 10.1145/3132747.3132772.
              P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

Das, M., Dhami, D. S., Yu, Y., Kunapuli, G., and Natara-         Hussein, A., Gaber, M. M., Elyan, E., and Jayne, C. Im-
  jan, S. Human-guided learning of column networks:                itation learning: A survey of learning methods. ACM
  Knowledge injection for relational deep learning. In            Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
  COMAD/CODS, 2021.
                                                                 Jacquet, P., Ledoux, T., and Rouvoy, R. Scroogevm: Boost-
De Haan, P., Jayaraman, D., and Levine, S. Causal confu-           ing cloud resource utilization with dynamic oversub-
  sion in imitation learning. Advances in Neural Informa-          scription. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing,
  tion Processing Systems, 32, 2019.                               2024.

Deng, C., Ji, X., Rainey, C., Zhang, J., and Lu, W. Integrat-    Jiang, L., Zhou, Z., Leung, T., Li, L.-J., and Fei-Fei, L. Men-
  ing machine learning with human knowledge. iScience,              tornet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very deep
  23(11):101656, 2020.                                              neural networks on corrupted labels. In ICML, 2018.

Du, Y., Watkins, O., Wang, Z., Colas, C., Darrell, T., Abbeel,   Judah, K., Fern, A., Tadepalli, P., and Goetschalckx, R. Imi-
  P., Gupta, A., and Andreas, J. Guiding pretraining in            tation learning with demonstrations and shaping rewards.
  reinforcement learning with large language models. In            In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8657–          telligence, volume 28, 2014.
  8677. PMLR, 2023.
                                                                 Kelly, M., Sidrane, C., Driggs-Campbell, K., and Kochen-
Englert, P., Paraschos, A., Deisenroth, M. P., and Peters, J.      derfer, M. J. Hg-dagger: Interactive imitation learning
  Probabilistic model-based imitation learning. Adaptive           with human experts. In ICRA, 2019.
  Behavior, 2013.
                                                                 Kim, B., Khanna, R., and Koyejo, O. O. Examples are not
Eppner, C., Sturm, J., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C., and           enough, learn to criticize! criticism for interpretability. In
  Burgard, W. Imitation learning with generalized task             Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  descriptions. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on           2280–2288, 2016.
  Robotics and Automation, pp. 3968–3974. IEEE, 2009.
                                                                 Kim, K.-E. and Park, H. S. Imitation learning via kernel
Franklin, M., Graybeal, P., and Cooper, D. Principles of           mean embedding. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on
  accounting. Volume 1: Financial accounting. OpenStax,            Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
  2019.
                                                                 Kolodner, J. L. An introduction to case-based reasoning.
Garcıa, J. and Fernández, F. A comprehensive survey on safe      Artificial intelligence review, 6(1):3–34, 1992.
  reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.                               Kunapuli, G., Odom, P., Shavlik, J. W., and Natarajan, S.
                                                                   Guiding autonomous agents to better behaviors through
Goldberger, J. and Ben-Reuven, E. Training deep neural-            human advice. In ICDM, 2013.
  networks using a noise adaptation layer. In ICLR, 2017.
                                                                 Lee, D.-H. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-
Hadary, O., Marshall, L., Menache, I., Pan, A., Greeff, E. E.,     supervised learning method for deep neural networks.
  Dion, D., Dorminey, S., Joshi, S., Chen, Y., Russinovich,        In Workshop on Challenges in Representation Learning,
  M., et al. Protean:VM allocation service at scale. In 14th       ICML, 2013.
  USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation (OSDI 20), pp. 845–861, 2020.                   Li, O., Liu, H., Chen, C., and Rudin, C. Deep learning
                                                                   for case-based reasoning through prototypes: A neural
Harel, S. and Radinsky, K. Accelerating prototype-based            network that explains its predictions. In Thirty-Second
  drug discovery using conditional diversity networks. In          AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
  Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.           Li, Z. An adaptive overload threshold selection process
  331–339, 2018.                                                   using markov decision processes of virtual machine in
                                                                   cloud data center. Cluster Computing, 22(2):3821–3833,
Ho, J. and Ermon, S. Generative adversarial imitation learn-       2019.
  ing. In NeurIPS, volume 29, 2016.
                                                                 Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T.,
Householder, R., Arnold, S., and Green, R. On cloud-based          Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control
  oversubscription. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.4758, 2014.          with deep reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2016.
             P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

Ma, R., Luijkx, J., Ajanovic, Z., and Kober, J. Explor-        Perico, C. A. V., De Schutter, J., and Aertbeliën, E. Com-
 llm: Guiding exploration in reinforcement learning with         bining imitation learning with constraint-based task spec-
 large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09583,         ification and control. IEEE Robotics and Automation
 2024.                                                           Letters, 4(2):1892–1899, 2019.
Mahapatra, N. R. and Venkatrao, B. The processor-memory        Pomerleau, D. A. Efficient training of artificial neural net-
 bottleneck: problems and solutions. Crossroads, 5(3es):         works for autonomous navigation. Neural computation,
 2, 1999.                                                        1991.

Mazyavkina, N., Sviridov, S., Ivanov, S., and Burnaev,         Qiao, B., Yang, F., Luo, C., Wang, Y., Li, J., Lin, Q., Zhang,
 E. Reinforcement learning for combinatorial optimiza-           H., Datta, M., Zhou, A., Moscibroda, T., et al. Intelligent
 tion: A survey. Computers & Operations Research, 134:           container reallocation at microsoft 365. In Proceedings of
 105400, 2021.                                                   the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engi-
                                                                 neering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
Meta. https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/                         of Software Engineering, pp. 1438–1443, 2021.
 Llama-3.1-70B, 2024.
                                                               Rauber, P., Ummadisingu, A., Mutz, F., and Schmidhuber, J.
Ming, Y., Xu, P., Qu, H., and Ren, L. Interpretable and          Reinforcement learning in sparse-reward environments
 steerable sequence learning via prototypes. In Proceed-         with hindsight policy gradients. Neural Computation, 33:
 ings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference            1498–1553, 2021.
 on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 903–913,
 2019.                                                         Rosch, E. H. Natural categories. Cognitive psychology, 4
                                                                 (3):328–350, 1973.
Minton, S., Carbonell, J. G., Knoblock, C. A., Kuokka,
 D. R., Etzioni, O., and Gil, Y. Explanation-based learning:   Ross, S. and Bagnell, D. Efficient reductions for imitation
 A problem solving perspective. Artificial Intelligence, 40      learning. In AISTATS, 2010.
 (1-3):63–118, 1989.
                                                               Rudin, C. Stop explaining black box machine learning
Miyato, T., Maeda, S.-i., Ishii, S., and Koyama, M. Virtual      models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable
 adversarial training: a regularization method for super-        models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1:206–215,
 vised and semi-supervised learning. TPAMI, 2018.                05 2019. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0048-x.

Molnar, C. Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com,          Sasaki, F. and Yamashina, R. Behavioral cloning from noisy
 2020.                                                           demonstrations. In International Conference on Learning
                                                                 Representations, 2021.
Mott, A., Zoran, D., Chrzanowski, M., Wierstra, D., and
 Rezende, D. J. Towards interpretable reinforcement            Sheng, J., Wang, L., Yang, F., Qiao, B., Dong, H., Wang,
 learning using attention augmented agents. In Advances          X., Jin, B., Wang, J., Qin, S., Rajmohan, S., et al. Learn-
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 12329–            ing cooperative oversubscription for cloud by chance-
 12338, 2019.                                                    constrained multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Pro-
                                                                 ceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 2927–
Neider, D., Gaglione, J.-R., Gavran, I., Topcu, U., Wu, B.,      2936, 2023.
  and Xu, Z. Advice-guided reinforcement learning in a
  non-markovian environment. In AAAI, 2021.                    Syed, U. and Schapire, R. E. Imitation learning with a
                                                                 value-based prior. In UAI, 2007.
Newell, A., Simon, H. A., et al. Human problem solving,
  volume 104. Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1972.        Verma, A., Murali, V., Singh, R., Kohli, P., and Chaudhuri,
                                                                 S. Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning.
Odom, P. and Natarajan, S. Active advice seeking for inverse     arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02477, 2018.
  reinforcement learning. In AAAI, 2015.
                                                               Wang, H. and Tianfield, H. Energy-aware dynamic vir-
Paternain, S., Chamon, L., Calvo-Fullana, M., and Ribeiro,      tual machine consolidation for cloud datacenters. IEEE
  A. Constrained reinforcement learning has zero duality        Access, 6:15259–15273, 2018.
  gap. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.                                                    Wang, L., Das, M., Yang, F., Du, C., Qiao, B., Dong, H.,
                                                                Bansal, C., Qin, S., Rajmohan, S., Lin, Q., Zhang, D., and
Patrini, G., Rozza, A., Menon, A. K., Nock, R., and Qu, L.      Zhang, Q. Coin: Chance-constrained imitation learning
  Making deep neural networks robust to label noise: A          for safe and adaptive resource oversubscription under un-
  loss correction approach. In CVPR, 2017.                      certainty. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International
             P R O T O RAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud

  Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
  CIKM ’24, 2024.
Williams, D., Jamjoom, H., Liu, Y.-H., and Weatherspoon,
 H. Overdriver: Handling memory overload in an oversub-
 scribed cloud. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 46(7):205–216,
 2011.

Wittman, M. D. Are low-cost carrier passengers less likely
 to complain about service quality? Journal of Air Trans-
 port Management, 35:64–71, 2014.
