Leviathan: A Unified System for General-Purpose Near-Data Computing
Brian C. Schwedock∗

Nathan Beckmann

Samsung
b.schwedock@samsung.com

Carnegie Mellon University
beckmann@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract—The rising cost of data movement poses a significant
challenge to future computing systems. The call to arms for novel
data-centric systems has spawned a wave of near-data computing
(NDC) architectures that move compute closer to data. Despite
large benefits promised by NDC, prior designs suffer from limited
applicability and difficult programming.
This paper identifies the commonalities and differences across
NDC designs to develop Leviathan, a unified architecture and
programming interface for near-cache NDC. We build a taxonomy
of NDC and identify the key dimensions as what, where, and when
to compute. Leviathan provides a simple reactive-programming
interface and automatically executes actions near data at the
right time and place. The ability to integrate multiple NDC
paradigms makes Leviathan the only general-purpose system to
support a variety of specialized NDC designs. Across a range of
NDC-specialized applications, Leviathan improves performance
by 1.5×–3.7× and reduces energy by 22%–77% vs. a baseline
multicore, while adding only ≈6% area compared to the last-level
cache.
Index Terms—near-data computing, data-centric computing,
data locality, cache hierarchy

L2

Engine
Code

L1i

L1d
NoC

Core

LLC Bank

Fig. 1: We divide prior near-data computing (NDC) into four
paradigms. Leviathan supports all paradigms, executing code
on near-data engines at the time and location dictated by the
paradigm. Programmers write Leviathan programs via a simple
reactive-programming interface, and Leviathan hardware ensures
that objects are efficiently packed within cache banks.

application domains and only support a subset of NDC’s design
paradigms (Table I). But it is not scalable or practical to add new
hardware for every potential application domain. Some recent
I. I NTRODUCTION
work has started to address this challenge via programmable
Computer systems are increasingly bottlenecked by the NDC, where software can configure the operations that execute
rising cost of data movement [20, 28, 32, 44, 84]. The near data [6, 11, 47, 54, 66, 79, 81, 90]. However, existing
inclusion of data-movement accelerators in recent commercial programmable NDC is still insufficient because it only targets
processors [15, 41, 72] indicates that traditional CPU scaling a limited subset of the broad NDC design space.
can no longer meet processing demands. Addressing the
Beyond limited scope, prior designs also expose too many
data-movement challenge has sparked a wave of architecture microarchitectural details to the programmer. Specifically, since
innovation on data-centric computing. A popular approach is existing NDCs rely on the underlying caches or DRAM for
near-data computing (NDC), which reduces data movement by data storage, their designs often require data to fit within and
moving compute closer to data, unlike conventional memory align to cache lines [18, 31, 47, 52, 66, 94, 95]. Exposing
hierarchies that pull data closer to compute.
such microarchitectural details to software, let alone forcing
Traditional near-memory NDC shows large benefits for programmers to reason about them, increases programming
applications with little data reuse, but it fails to exploit the difficulty and makes NDC unapproachable.
locality present in most workloads. Blindly moving all compute Opportunity and insight. We observe that neither of these
to main memory can actually harm performance [4, 34, 47, issues is fundamental to NDC. With the goal of designing a
76, 91]. This limitation is addressed by near-cache NDC [1, 2, practical NDC system, we first perform an extensive study on
5, 6, 8, 18, 22, 24, 33, 37, 38, 42, 43, 47, 48, 52, 56, 57, 64, prior NDC proposals and build a taxonomy that captures their
66, 69, 74, 77, 85, 88–90, 92–95], which augments a cache similarities and differences (Sec. II). We find that prior designs
hierarchy with processing capability. Near-cache NDC allows largely fall into only one of four main paradigms (Fig. 1), but
systems to move compute closer to data while also exploiting many applications require multiple paradigms to see the full
locality, unlocking the full potential of data-centric computing. benefits of NDC.
The problem: Prior NDC is too limited and hard to use.
Prior work has treated each paradigm separately, but we
Despite the large benefits promised by NDC, there remain observe that a similar structure underlies them. Each paradigm
significant roadblocks to its practical adoption in general- can be roughly broken down into three components: what to
purpose systems. Most proposals target a narrow range of execute, where to execute, and when to execute. By placing
general-purpose hardware near caches, programmable NDC
∗ This work was completed while the author was affiliated with Carnegie
Mellon University.
addresses “what,” but “when” and “where” remain unsolved.

