Pushing the Performance
Recommendation Syste
Rishabh Jain
Computer Science and Engineering
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
rishabh@psu.edu

arXiv:2410.22249v1 [cs.AR] 29 Oct 2024

Anand Sivasubramaniam
Computer Science and Engineering
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
axs53@psu.edu

Viv

Computer
The Penn
Unive
vm

Mahm

Computer Sc
The Pennsyl
Universi
m

Abstract—Personalized recommendation is a ubiquitous application on the internet, with many industries and hyperscalers
extensively leveraging Deep Learning Recommendation Models
(DLRMs) for their personalization needs (like ad serving or movie
suggestions). With growing model and dataset sizes pushing computation and memory requirements, GPUs are being increasingly
preferred for executing DLRM inference. However, serving newer
DLRMs, while meeting acceptable latencies, continues to remain
challenging, making traditional deployments increasingly more
GPU-hungry, resulting in higher inference serving costs. In this
paper, we show that the embedding stage continues to be the
primary bottleneck in the GPU inference pipeline, leading up to
a 3.2× embedding-only performance slowdown.
To thoroughly grasp the problem, we conduct a detailed
microarchitecture characterization and highlight the presence of
low occupancy in the standard embedding kernels. By leveraging
direct compiler optimizations, we achieve optimal occupancy,
pushing the performance by up to 53%. Yet, long memory latency
stalls continue to exist. To tackle this challenge, we propose specialized plug-and-play-based software prefetching and L2 pinning
techniques, which help in hiding and decreasing the latencies.
Further, we propose combining them, as they complement each
other. Experimental evaluations using A100 GPUs with large
models and datasets show that our proposed techniques improve
performance by up to 103% for the embedding stage, and up to
77% for the overall DLRM inference pipeline.
Index Terms—Recommendation Systems, Multi-threading,
Warp-Level-Parallelism, Embeddings, memory-latency bound,
Long latency load stalls, Prefetching, Cache residency control

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recommendation Systems are the driving force for many
internet applications such as social networks [1]–[3], entertainment [4]–[6], and e-commerce [4], [7], [8]. Modern
recommendation systems provide personalized suggestions
to enhance user experience through Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRM) [9]. The growing importance
of DLRMs is evident in their widespread deployment by
hyperscalers for both training and inference. This translates to
a significant portion of AI inference cycles being dedicated to

