Leviathan: A Unified System for Ge
Brian C. Schwedock∗
Samsung
b.schwedock@samsung.com

Abstract—The rising cost of data movement poses a significant
challenge to future computing systems. The call to arms for novel
data-centric systems has spawned a wave of near-data computing
(NDC) architectures that move compute closer to data. Despite
large benefits promised by NDC, prior designs suffer from limited
applicability and difficult programming.
This paper identifies the commonalities and differences across
NDC designs to develop Leviathan, a unified architecture and
programming interface for near-cache NDC. We build a taxonomy
of NDC and identify the key dimensions as what, where, and when
to compute. Leviathan provides a simple reactive-programming
interface and automatically executes actions near data at the
right time and place. The ability to integrate multiple NDC
paradigms makes Leviathan the only general-purpose system to
support a variety of specialized NDC designs. Across a range of
NDC-specialized applications, Leviathan improves performance
by 1.5×–3.7× and reduces energy by 22%–77% vs. a baseline
multicore, while adding only ≈6% area compared to the last-level
cache.
Index Terms—near-data computing, data-centric computing,
data locality, cache hierarchy

I. I NTRODUCTION
Computer systems are increasingly bottlenecked by the
rising cost of data movement [20, 28, 32, 44, 84]. The
inclusion of data-movement accelerators in recent commercial
processors [15, 41, 72] indicates that traditional CPU scaling
can no longer meet processing demands. Addressing the
data-movement challenge has sparked a wave of architecture
innovation on data-centric computing. A popular approach is
near-data computing (NDC), which reduces data movement by
moving compute closer to data, unlike conventional memory
hierarchies that pull data closer to compute.
Traditional near-memory NDC shows large benefits for
applications with little data reuse, but it fails to exploit the
locality present in most workloads. Blindly moving all compute
to main memory can actually harm performance [4, 34, 47,
76, 91]. This limitation is addressed by near-cache NDC [1, 2,
5, 6, 8, 18, 22, 24, 33, 37, 38, 42, 43, 47, 48, 52, 56, 57, 64,
66, 69, 74, 77, 85, 88–90, 92–95], which augments a cache
hierarchy with processing capability. Near-cache NDC allows
systems to move compute closer to data while also exploiting
locality, unlocking the full potential of data-centric computing.
The problem: Prior NDC is too limited and hard to use.
Despite the large benefits promised by NDC, there remain
significant roadblocks to its practical adoption in generalpurpose systems. Most proposals target a narrow range of
∗ This work was completed while the author was affiliated with Carnegie
Mellon University.

