Salus: A Practical Trusted Execution Environment for
CPU-FPGA Heterogeneous Cloud Platforms
Yu Zou

Yiran Li

Sheng Wang∗

zouyu.zou@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group

yiranli.lyr@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group

sh.wang@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group

Le Su

Zhen Gu

Yanheng Lu

le.su@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group

guzhen.gz@alibaba-inc.com
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab

yanheng.lyh@alibaba-inc.com
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab

Yijin Guan

Dimin Niu

Mingyu Gao

yijin.gyj@alibaba-inc.com
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab

dimin.niu@alibaba-inc.com
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab

gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Yuan Xie

Feifei Li

y.xie@alibaba-inc.com
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab

lifeifei@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group

Abstract

IP, Salus presents a practical design for an FPGA TEE, with
minor efforts required.

CPU-FPGA heterogeneous architectures have become increasingly popular in cloud environments for accelerating
compute-intensive tasks. Ensuring the protection of sensitive
data processed by these architectures requires the presence of
a trusted execution environment (TEE). This work highlights
the requirements for designing an FPGA TEE, the challenges
faced in deploying existing solutions on commercial-off-theshelf (COTS) cloud FPGA services, and the limitations of
previous works that primarily focus on standalone FPGA
TEEs. In response to these challenges, Salus introduces an
innovative approach by leveraging an enclave running on
the host with a TEE-enabled CPU. This approach aims to
protect and attest the bitstream loaded on the FPGA side.
By repurposing COTS FPGA bitstream utilities in a novel
manner and adopting a proposed security-enhanced FPGA

ACM Reference Format:
Yu Zou, Yiran Li, Sheng Wang, Le Su, Zhen Gu, Yanheng Lu, Yijin Guan, Dimin Niu, Mingyu Gao, Yuan Xie, and Feifei Li. 2024.
Salus: A Practical Trusted Execution Environment for CPU-FPGA
Heterogeneous Cloud Platforms. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024,
La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674169

1

Introduction

In the cloud, a high volume of user data flows through shared
infrastructures maintained by cloud service providers (CSPs).
It is crucial to prioritize data privacy when constructing
these cloud infrastructures. Trusted execution environment
(TEE) offers a secure solution to prevent data breaches, by
providing a hardware-isolated environment for executing
programs, known as enclaves.
In addition to data privacy, computing efficiency is a significant focus in cloud computing. Prominent CSPs like AWS [1],
Azure [8], and Alibaba [10] offer FPGA-as-a-Service (FaaS),
enabling users to efficiently offload computing tasks to hardware accelerators. FaaS partitions an FPGA device into a
shell and custom logic (CL). Users deploy their own accelerator logic onto the CL, while the CSP-maintained shell
functions as a privileged OS, responsible for CL deployment,
I/O monitoring, and resource management. Beyond inheriting vulnerabilities from CPU standalone platforms, FaaS

∗ Sheng Wang is the corresponding author of this paper.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674169
1

