                                                                 Reducing Activation Recomputation
                                                                    in Large Transformer Models
                                         Vijay Korthikanti, Jared Casper, Sangkug Lym, Lawrence McAfee, Michael Andersch,
                                                              Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro
                                                                                           NVIDIA
arXiv:2205.05198v1 [cs.LG] 10 May 2022




                                                                                            Abstract
                                                   Training large transformer models is one of the most important computational challenges of
                                               modern AI. In this paper, we show how to significantly accelerate training of large transformer
                                               models by reducing activation recomputation. Activation recomputation is commonly used to work
                                               around memory capacity constraints. Rather than storing activations for backpropagation, they
                                               are traditionally recomputed, which saves memory but adds redundant compute. In this work, we
                                               show most of this redundant compute is unnecessary because we can reduce memory consumption
                                               sufficiently without it. We present two novel yet very simple techniques: sequence parallelism
                                               and selective activation recomputation. In conjunction with tensor parallelism, these techniques
                                               almost eliminate the need to recompute activations. We evaluate our approach on language models
                                               up to one trillion parameters in scale and show that our method reduces activation memory by
                                               5×, while reducing execution time overhead from activation recomputation by over 90%. For
                                               example, when training a 530B parameter GPT-3 style model [20] on 2240 NVIDIA A100 GPUs,
                                               we achieve a Model Flops Utilization of 54.2%, which is 29% faster than the 42.1% we achieve
                                               using recomputation. Our implementation will be available in both Megatron-LM1 and NeMo-
                                               Megatron2 .


                                         1     Introduction
                                         As transformer models scale towards trillions of parameters, model parallelism is required to distribute
                                         model parameters, activations, and optimizer state across devices for them to fit into device memory
                                         and be trainable in a realistic amount of time. Although model parallelism linearly reduces the number
                                         of parameters per device, e.g., number of parameters per device is halved when model parallel size is
                                         doubled, there are limits to scale model parallelism. Tensor-level model parallelism increases commu-
                                         nication requirements and introduces smaller and less performant matrix multiplications, making it
                                         inefficient to split a model across a large number of devices. As a result, tensor-level model parallelism
                                         is typically limited to a relatively small group of GPUs that are connected with high speed bandwidth,
                                         such as GPUs connected with NVLink inside a DGX server. Pipeline parallelism requires storing the
                                         activations of several microbatches to reduce the pipeline bubble [13]. As a result, pipeline parallelism
                                         can only help with the memory needed to store model parameters and optimizer state and cannot
                                         reduce the memory needed for activations while maintaining high device utilization. Thus the storage
                                         of activations quickly becomes a critical problem to scaling large transformer models.
                                             To quantify this, Figure 1 shows the memory required for four model configurations ranging from
                                         22 billion parameters to 1 trillion parameters (details of the model configurations are provided in Table
                                         3). It can be seen that for all these cases, the required memory for the baseline cases is above the 80GB
                                         memory provided by an NVIDIA A100 GPU. The standard approach to alleviate this memory pressure
                                         is to simply not store most of the activations and recompute them as necessary to calculate gradients
                                         during the backward pass [5]. Unfortunately this method, usually called “gradient checkpointing” or
                                            1 https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM Megatron-LM is an ongoing research project pushing the limits of scale

                                         for transformer models.
                                            2 https://developer.nvidia.com/nvidia-nemo. NeMo-Megatron is NVIDIA’s officially supported product for train-

                                         ing large language models.



                                                                                                1
Figure 1: Parameters, optimizer state, and activations memory. The dashed red line represents the
memory capacity of an NVIDIA A100 GPU. Present work reduces the activation memory required to
fit the model. Details of the model configurations are provided in Table 3.



“activation recomputation”, incurs a steep penalty of reducing training efficiency. For transformer
architectures, majority of prior work has checkpointed, or stored, the activations at transformer layer
boundaries and recomputed the rest of the necessary activations in the backward pass. In this paper
we refer to this method as “full activation recomputation”. In our training runs, we observe 30 − 40%
execution time overhead when full activation recomputation is used.
     In this paper we present novel techniques that help alleviate the memory pressure of storing ac-
tivations and thus reduce the need to recompute activations. These techniques are specific to the
transformer architecture and are both simple to implement and have no, or very low, impact on com-
pute efficiency. As we detail in Section 2, there are several other techniques to reduce the memory
requirements of training large models, such as partitioning various data across the data parallel ranks
or offloading data to CPU memory [14, 17]. These techniques are complementary to the techniques
presented here and could be additionally employed for even greater memory savings; however, in gen-
eral these other techniques have both higher implementation cost and a larger impact on compute
efficiency than the techniques presented in this paper. An analysis comparing these techniques to ours
is outside the scope of this paper and left for future work.
     We begin with a brief review of the transformer architecture and then build up an approximate
formula for the memory required to store activations of a transformer model. Using this formula we
can then study how different forms of model parallelism impact the activation memory requirements.
We introduce sequence parallelism alongside tensor parallelism to prevent redundant storage of acti-
vations in regions that are not conducive to standard tensor parallelism. We then show that by being
selective in what activations are saved and what are recomputed we can eliminate much of the cost of
recomputation while using only a fraction of the memory when no recomputation is used. Finally, we
present several experiments that measure the improvements these techniques make to both individual
components of training as well as the full training throughput.


2    Related Work
Model parallelism enables training very large models across multiple GPUs. Model parameters along
with the associated optimizer states of these models require a huge amount of memory and do not fit
on a single GPU. Even if we are able to fit the model in a single GPU (e.g., by swapping parameters
between host and device memory [17]), the high number of compute operations required can result
in unrealistically long training times. This calls for parallelism. Two forms of model parallelism
are commonly used to distribute the model parameters across GPUs: 1) tensor parallelism where


                                                  2
                     a   number of attention heads        p   pipeline parallel size
                     b   microbatch size                  s   sequence length
                     h   hidden dimension size            t   tensor parallel size
                     L   number of transformer layers     v   vocabulary size

                                       Table 1: Variable names.


parameters of each layer are distributed across many devices [18, 19, 21], and 2) pipeline parallelism
where the model is split along the layer dimension of the network [7, 10, 11]. Some recent approaches
combine both types of model parallelism to enable training large models up to 1T parameters [13].
    An alternative to model parallelism is to combine a number of training techniques along with data
parallelism to enable large scale model training [14, 17, 15, 16]. This approach is based on sharding the
optimizer states, gradients, and parameters across data-parallel ranks. Also, a recent extension [15]
uses CPU off-loading techniques to enable multi-trillion parameter model training on a small number
of GPUs. Compared to model parallelism, these techniques, which are based on data parallelism,
are less efficient and do not scale well to a large numbers of GPUs [13] and are thus a better fit for
finetuning models in resource-constrained environments. This paper focuses only on model parallelism
optimizations. An analysis comparing these techniques to ours is outside the scope of this paper.
    In addition, tensor parallelism as introduced in Megatron-LM [19] helps to reduce the activation
memory to some extent. In this approach, there are parts of the transformer where activations are not
split across tensor parallel ranks, adding to activation memory overhead. Sequence parallelism as sug-
gested in [9] where activations are partitioned along sequence dimensions throughout the network can
alleviate this problem. However, their approach, similar to data parallelism, requires the parameters
and optimizer state to be replicated on all of the devices which makes it not suitable for large model
training. Sagemaker [8] and GSPMD [21] propose memory efficient versions of tensor parallelism which
splits the activations across the devices along the hidden dimension throughout the network. The main
drawback of these approaches is that they encompass multi-device layer normalization which is very
compute/communication inefficient. Along with layer-norm communication, Sagemaker [8] does four
reduce-scatter communications per transformer layer in comparison to just two all-reduce communi-
cations in the Megatron-LM approach. In this paper, we present a new technique which leverages the
advantages of both tensor parallelism and sequence parallelism without any of the previous approaches’
shortcomings. In other words, our technique, which mixes both tensor and sequence parallelism, re-
duces the activation memory significantly without any additional compute, communication, or memory
overhead.


3    Transformer Architecture
In this work, we consider a single stack transformer encoder or decoder with L layers as shown in
Figure 2. At the start of the network, the input tokens are fed into a word embedding table with size
v ×h and the token embeddings are combined with learned positional embeddings with size s×h where
s is the sequence length, h is the hidden dimension, and v is the vocabulary size. The output of the
embedding layer, which is the input to the transformer block, is a 3-D tensor of size s × b × h where
b is the microbatch size. Each transformer layer consists of a self-attention block with a attention
heads followed by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with two layers which increase the hidden size to
4h and then reduce it back to h. Input to and output from each transformer layer have the same size
s × b × h. The output from the last transformer layer is projected back into the vocabulary dimension
to calculate the cross-entropy loss. We assume that word embedding and output layer weights are
shared. Variable names are listed in Table 1 for reference.


4    Activation Memory
In this section, we derive an approximate formula for the memory required to store activations in the
forward pass of a single stack transformer model as shown in Figure 2. Note that “activations” in this
paper refers to any tensor that is created in the forward pass and is necessary for gradient computation



                                                   3
Figure 2: Transformer Architecture. Each gray block represents a single transformer layer that is
replicated L times.



during back-propagation. As a result, this excludes the main parameters of the model and optimizer
state, but, for example, includes the mask used by the dropout operation.
    In addition, we only consider the main contributors to the memory and ignore small buffers. For
example, for a layer normalization block, the input to the layer as well as the input’s mean and variance
are required to calculate the gradients. The input contains sbh elements whereas mean and variance
have only sb elements each. Since h is large (of order of thousands), we have 2sb  sbh. As a result it
is a good approximation to only consider the memory required to store the input, i.e., we only include
sbh, not sbh + 2sb.
    We also assume that the network and the activations are stored in a 16-bit floating point format
and therefore each element requires 2 bytes for storage. The only exceptions are the dropout masks
which only require a single byte per element. Note that all the reported sizes in this section are in
bytes and not number of elements unless explicitly mentioned.

4.1    Activations Memory Per Transformer Layer
As shown in Figure 2, each transformer layer consists of an attention and an MLP block connected
with two layer-norms. Below, we derive the memory required to store activations for each of these
elements:
   Attention block: which includes self attention followed by a linear projection and an attention
dropout. The linear projection stores its input activations with size 2sbh and the attention dropout
requires a mask with size sbh. The self attention shown in Figure 3 consists of several elements:
   • Query (Q), Key (K), and Value (V ) matrix multiplies: We only need to store their shared
     input with size 2sbh.
   • QK T matrix multiply: It requires storage of both Q and K with total size 4sbh.
   • Softmax: Softmax output with size 2as2 b is required for back-propagation.
   • Softmax dropout: Only a mask with size as2 b is needed.
   • Attention over Values (V ): We need to store the dropout output (2as2 b) and the Values
     (2sbh) and therefore need 2as2 b + 2sbh of storage.
Summing the above values, in total, the attention block requires 11sbh + 5as2 b bytes of storage.
    MLP: The two linear layers store their inputs with size 2sbh and 8sbh. The GeLU non-linearity
also needs its input with size 8sbh for back-propagation. Finally, dropout stores its mask with size
sbh. In total, MLP block requires 19sbh bytes of storage.
    Layer norm: Each layer norm stores its input with size 2sbh and therefore in total, we will need
4sbh of storage.
    Summing the memory required for attention, MLP, and the layer-norms, the memory required to
store the activations for a single layer of a transformer network is:
                                                                     as 
                           Activations memory per layer = sbh 34 + 5       .                      (1)
                                                                      h

                                                   4
Figure 3: Self-attention block. The red dashed line shows the regions to which selective activation
recomputation is applied (see Section 5 for more details on selective activation recomputation).



The above equation is for the case that no form of model parallelism is applied.

4.2     Model Parallelism
In this section we start by quantifying the effect of tensor parallelism on the required activation memory
per layer. We then introduce a novel method called sequence parallelism that further reduces per layer
memory required by activations. At the end of this section, we also discuss the effect of pipeline
parallelism on activations memory and derive a formula for the total memory required by activations.

4.2.1   Tensor Parallelism
We use tensor parallelism developed by Shoeybi, et.al.[19] and parallelize the attention as well as
MLP blocks as shown in Figure 4. This form of parallelism introduces two additional communication
operations f and f¯. For more details, please see the paper[19].




Figure 4: Transformer layer with tensor parallelism. f and f¯ are conjugate. f is no operation in the
forward pass and all-reduce in the backward pass. f¯ is all-reduce in the forward pass and no operation
in the backward pass.


   Not only does tensor parallelism parallelize model parameters and optimizer states inside the at-
tention and MLP blocks, but it also parallelizes the activations inside those blocks. Note that the
input activations to these blocks (for example input to the Q, K, and V matrix multiplies or input to
the h → 4h linear layer) are not parallelized, and only activations within each block are divided across
the tensor parallel group3 . Assuming t-way tensor parallelism, the per-layer memory required to store
the activations reduces from Equation 1 to:
                                                                              
                                                                     24     as
                        Activations memory per layer = sbh 10 +         +5       .                   (2)
                                                                      t     ht
  3 The tensor parallel group is the group of accelerators that participate in tensor parallelism




                                                           5
4.2.2   Sequence Parallelism
Tensor parallelism, as shown in Figure 4, parallelizes the parts of the transformer layer that take
the most time during training and as a result, it is computationally efficient. However, it leaves the
layer-norms as well as the dropouts after attention and MLP blocks intact and as a result, they are
replicated across the tensor parallel group. These elements do not require a lot of compute but demand
a considerable amount of activation memory. Quantitatively, the 10sbh part of Equation 2 is due to
these replicated operations and as a result they are not divided by the tensor parallel size t.
    We notice that in the non-tensor parallel regions of a transformer layer, the operations are inde-
pendent along the sequence dimension. This characteristic allows us to partition these regions along
the sequence dimension s. Partitioning along the sequence dimension reduces the memory required
for the activations. This extra level of parallelism introduces new communication collectives before
f and after f¯ which will act as converters between sequence and tensor parallel regions. For exam-
ple, in the forward pass, we need an extra all-gather before the operator f in Figure 4. These extra
communications introduce overhead and will slow down the training.
    To avoid these extra communications, we combine these operations with the f and f¯ operators and
introduce new operations g and ḡ as shown in Figure 5. As it can be seen, g and ḡ are the converters
between sequence and tensor parallel regions. We derive these operations in the remainder of this
section.




Figure 5: Transformer layer with tensor and sequence parallelism. g and ḡ are conjugate. g is all-gather
in the forward pass and reduce-scatter in the backward pass. ḡ is reduce-scatter in forward pass and
all-gather in backward pass.


    We detail g and ḡ’s derivation using the MLP block. In the non-parallel form, as shown in Figure
2, the layer-norm followed by the MLP block can be formulated as:
                                          Y = LayerNorm(X),
                                           Z = GeLU(Y A),
                                          W = ZB,
                                          V = Dropout(W ),
where X is input to the layer-norm with size s × b × h and A and B are the weight matrices of the
linear layers with size h × 4h and 4h × h, respectively. The combined tensor and sequence parallel form
of the above operations is shown in Figure 6. The subscripts represent splitting among accelerators
and superscripts depict the dimension along which the splitting is done. For example, X1s is the first
accelerator’s part of X that is split along the s dimension (sequence dimension) while Z2h is the second
accelerator’s part of Z that is split along the h dimension (hidden dimension).
    The input to the layer-norm is parallelized along the sequence dimension X = [X1s , X2s ]. As a result,
the output of the layer-norm will also be parallel along the sequence dimension Y = [Y1s , Y2s ]. The
linear layer with GeLU non-linearity requires the entire input Y and therefore we need to perform an
all-gather. This implies that g is an all-gather operation along the sequence dimension in the forward
pass. By splitting A along its columns (Ac1 and Ac2 ) and B along its rows (B1r and B2r ), we avoid
communications (for more details please see [19]) and arrive at W1 and W2 . These two tensors are not
parallel anymore and need to be summed as W = W1 + W2 before they are fed into the dropout layer.
However, dropout needs its input to be parallel in the sequence dimension s. Instead of summing and


                                                    6
Figure 6: MLP layer with tensor and sequence parallelism. g and ḡ are conjugate. g is all-gather in
forward pass and reduce-scatter in backward pass. ḡ is reduce-scatter in forward pass and all-gather
in backward pass.



then parallelizing in the sequence dimension, we combine these two operations into a reduce-scatter
operation. As a result, ḡ can be a single reduce-scatter operation in the forward pass. Putting it all
together, we arrive at:

                                [Y1s , Y2s ] = LayerNorm([X1s , X2s ]),
                                       Y = g(Y1s , Y2s ),
                               [Z1h , Z2h ] = [GeLU(Y Ac1 ), GeLU(Y Ac2 )],
                                                                                                       (3)
                                     W1 = Z1h B1r and W2 = Z2h B2r ,
                              [W1s , W2s ] = ḡ(W1 , W2 ),
                                [V1s , V2s ] = [Dropout(W1s ), Dropout(W2s )].

If we follow a similar break-down for the backward pass, we find that g and ḡ are conjugate of each
other. g is an all-gather in the forward pass and a reduce-scatter in the backward pass, and ḡ is a
reduce-scatter in the forward pass and an all-gather in the backward pass. A similar breakdown done
for the layer-norm followed by the attention part of the transformer layer arrives at Figure 5.
    Tensor parallelism requires four all-reduces in a single forward and backward pass whereas tensor
together with sequence parallelism requires four all-gathers and four reduce-scatters in a single forward
and backward pass. At the first look, it seems that tensor with sequence parallelism requires more
communications compared to tensor parallelism. However, we note that a ring all-reduce is composed
of two steps: a reduce-scatter followed by an all-gather. As a result, the communication bandwidth
used for tensor parallelism and tensor together with sequence parallelism are the same. Therefore,
sequence parallelism does not introduce any communication overhead.
    From Equation 3, sequence parallelism along with tensor parallelism divides all the activations
required for the backward pass along the parallel dimension except for the tensor Y that is required
for the first linear operation. To alleviate this issue, we do not store the full tensor Y for the backward
pass. Instead, we store only the Yis part on the ith tensor parallel rank and perform an extra all-gather
in the backward pass. To eliminate the latency introduced by this extra all-gather, we overlap this
communication with the computation required to calculate gradients with respect to Y , and as a result,
we reduce the overhead.
    Using sequence parallelism along with tensor parallelism, the memory required to store the activa-
tions per transformer layer reduces from Equation 2 to:
                                                                       
                                                         10 24       as      sbh          as 
                Activations memory per layer = sbh          +    +5       =         34 + 5      .       (4)
                                                          t    t     ht        t           h

The above equation is now Equation 1 divided by the tensor parallel size. This means that using tensor
and sequence parallelism, we can distribute activations among the tensor parallel group and reduce
the required memory by tensor parallel size t.


                                                       7
4.2.3    Pipeline Parallelism
Pipeline parallelism simply divides the L layers of the transformer into L/p groups of layers where p
is the pipeline parallel size. However, pipeline parallelism does not uniformly divide the total memory
required for activations by p. This is due to the overlapping that pipeline parallel schedules introduce
to reduce the pipeline bubble [13].
    To quantify this, we consider the 1F1B pipeline schedule developed in PipeDream [12]. Schedules
that have a minimized pipeline bubble put the most memory pressure on the first stage of the pipeline
(first stage of the pipeline refers to first group of L/p layers which also includes the input embeddings).
A visualization of activation memory as a function of pipeline stage is shown in Appendix B. To
keep the pipeline pressurized and avoid extra idle time, the first stage must store activations for p
microbatches (for more details see Figure 4-top of [13]). Each stage contains L/p layers so the first
stage must store p × L/p = L layers worth of activations regardless of the pipeline parallel size p.
Therefore, the total memory required to store activations in the first stage is:
                                                           sbhL         as 
                            Total activations memory =            34 + 5      .                        (5)
                                                             t           h
    For other pipeline schedules, the total memory required would be slightly different. For example,
the interleaving schedule developed in Megatron-LM [13] requires storing activations for L(1 + p−1 pm )
layers where m is the number of interleaving stages. As a result, if the interleaving schedule is used,
then the total activation memory should be scaled by (1 + p−1
                                                           pm ).


4.3     Total Activations Memory
The majority of the required activation memory is captured by Equation 5. However, this equation
does not capture activation memory required for the input embeddings, the last layer-norm, and the
output layer as shown in Figure 2.
    Position and word embeddings do not require any considerable activations to be stored for the
backward pass. However, the dropout requires storage. The dropout in the embeddings layer is also
parallelized along the sequence dimension. As a result, it will require sbhp/t storage. Note that the
factor p comes from the pipeline parallelism and the fact that we need to store p microbatches (see
Section 4.2.3).
    The layer-norm before the output layer also uses sequence parallelism and as a result requires
2sbh/t storage. The output layer projection into vocabulary dimension will require its input with size
2sbh/t to be stored. Finally, the cross entropy loss requires storing the logits which are calculated in
32-bit floating point and as a result will require 4sbv/t of storage. Note that since we only consider
activations in the first stage of the pipeline, the above activations, i.e., 4sbh/t(1 + v/h) in total, are
only included for the case that there is no pipeline parallelism (p = 1).
    Adding the above memory, the extra memory due to the input embeddings, the last layer-norm,
and the output layer is:                                         
                                      sbhL p            4     v
                                                 + δp=1    1+
                                        t     L         L      h
where δp=1 is 1 for p = 1 and 0 otherwise. We note that compared to term 34 + 5 as
                                                                                h from Equation 5,
both p/L and 4/L(1 + v/h) are negligible. For example, for a model with 22B parameters, these extra
terms account for less than 0.01% of the total activation memory requirements. As a result, Equation
5 is a good approximation to the total required activations memory and we will use it in the rest of
this paper.


5       Selective Activation Recomputation
The total required activation memory from Equation 5 can still be considerable for large models.
Activation recomputation [5] overcomes this memory limitation by storing (or ”checkpointing”) the
input activations to a group of layers and recomputing other required activations using an extra
forward pass during back-propagation (this is referred to in this paper as full activation recomputation).
Assuming the groups contain only a single layer, and ignoring activations outside of the transformer
layers, this method reduces the total required memory for activations to 2sbhL. We note that this


                                                    8
                     Configuration                Activations Memory Per Transformer Layer
                                                               sbh 34 + 5 as
                                                                             
                     no parallelism                                       h

                                                              sbh 10 + 24     as
                                                                                        
               tensor parallel (baseline)                               t + 5 ht

                                                                        34     as
                                                                                    
              tensor + sequence parallel                         sbh     t + 5 ht

                     tensor parallel +
                                                                  sbh 10 + 24
                                                                                   
           selective activation recomputation                               t

         tensor parallel + sequence parallel +
                                                                       sbh( 34
                                                                             t )
           selective activation recomputation
             full activation recomputation                             sbh(2)

        Table 2: Activations memory, in bytes, per transformer layer for different techniques.


required memory can be further reduced to 2sbhL/t if we only store a portion of activations in each
tensor parallel rank. However, this approach requires an extra all-gather per layer and will add
communication overhead and, as a result, we do not consider this approach.
     Compared to storing all activations (Equation 5), checkpointing all transformer layers significantly
reduces the amount of memory required to train a model. This reduction does come at the cost of the
recomputation (an extra forward pass) which can introduce as much as 30 − 40% computational time
overhead. To balance the memory savings and computational overhead, it is ideal to only checkpoint
enough activations to allow a given model-parallel configuration to train given the constraints of device
memory. The memory savings provided by sequence parallelism allows many more configurations to
train without recomputation than before, but the optimal model parallel configurations of large models
still generally require some saving and recomputing of activations. A simple approach to choose the
amount of activations that are stored vs recomputed is to only checkpoint some of the transformer layers
and store all the activations of other layers. This approach does not scale very well to large models;
for example, when training MT-NLG there are only three layers per device, limiting the granularity at
which you can balance memory vs compute. Additionally, we note that not all activations require the
same amount of operations to recompute so it is beneficial to be smarter in selecting which activations
to store and which to recompute.
     Instead of checkpointing and recomputing full transformer layers, we propose to checkpoint and
recompute only parts of each transformer layer that take up a considerable amount of memory but
are not computationally expensive to recompute, or selective activation recomputation. To this end,
we note that the term 5as/h in Equation 5 is due to the attention operations after the width of the
network is increased by the linear layer calculating the Q, K, and V values; i.e., QK T matrix multiply,
softmax, softmax dropout, and attention over V as shown in Figure 3. These operations generally
have large input sizes and thus large activations, however, the number of floating-point operations
(FLOPs) per input element is very low. The rest of the transformer layer accounts for the 34 term in
Equation 5. Thus, for large models where 5as/h > 34, if we checkpoint and recompute this part of the
transformer layer, we store less than half of the activations and only have a modest cost to recompute
those that aren’t stored.
     To quantify this, let’s consider GPT-3 [4] and MT-NLG [20] models, some of the largest models that
have been trained so far. For GPT-3, a = 96, s = 2048, and h = 12288 and as a result 5as/h = 80. For
MT-NLG, a = 128, s = 2048, and h = 20480 so 5as/h = 64. Comparing these numbers to 34, which
is the factor for the rest of the layer, we can see these activations account for a large portion of the
total activations. Thus, by using selective activation recomputation we can save 70% and 65% of the
required memory for activations for the GPT-3 and MT-NLG models, respectively. The recomputation
of these activations introduces only 2.7% and 1.6% FLOPs overhead for these two models. For more
details on the FLOPs calculations see Appendix A.
     Using this form of selective activation recomputation, the memory needed to store activation de-
creases from Equation 5 to:
                                                                 sbhL
                                     Total required memory = 34       .                               (6)
                                                                   t


                                                   9
       Model           Attention    Hidden                  Tensor     Pipeline   Number     Global    Micro
        Size            Heads        Size      Layers       Parallel   Parallel      of      Batch     Batch
                                                             Size        Size      GPUs       Size      Size
       22B                 64         6144        48           8          1          8          4        4
  175B (GPT-3)             96        12288        96           8          8          64        64        1
 530B (MT-NLG)            128        20480       105           8          35        280       280        1
       1T                 160        25600       128           8          64        512       512        1

Table 3: Model configurations used during evaluation. Note that no data parallelism is used in our
evaluations and as a result, the batch sizes as well as total number of GPUs are set to a value much
lower than the ones in the end-to-end training.


    The above equation shows that using selective activation recomputation allows the required acti-
vation memory to scale linearly with sequence length and be independent of the number of attention
heads. As was discussed in Section 4.2.3, in the case of an interleaved pipeline schedule, the above
equation needs to be multiplied by (1 + p−1
                                          pm ).
    When using pipeline parallelism, as discussed in Section 4.2.3, even though a given device only
has L/p layers, the first stage must still store an equivalent of L layers of activations since it must
store activations for p microbatches to keep the pipeline pressurized. An additional technique that
can be employed to reduce the recomputation cost in this case is to store all the activations for as
many microbatches as possible given available device memory, and do full or selective recomputation
of the rest. In practice we find that after applying sequence parallelism and selective activation
recomputation the recomputation overhead is small enough that this additional technique provides
very modest improvement. This technique is described in more detail and analyzed in Appendix C.


6     Evaluations
In this section, we evaluate the impact of our proposed approach on both memory usage as well as
execution speed of training. Table 3 lists the model configurations used in the evaluations. We consider
models up to one trillion parameters and for all these models, the tenor parallel size is set to 8. We use
the interleaving schedule with three interleaving stages (m = 3) for the 175B and 530B models. For
all the cases, sequence length is set to s = 2048 and vocabulary size is set to v = 51200. We also note
that no data parallelism is considered in these evaluations since our approach is independent of data
parallelism. As a result, the batch sizes used in our analysis are much lower than the ones used for the
end-to-end training. All of our results are run with mixed precision on the Selene supercomputer [3].
Each cluster node has 8 NVIDIA 80GB A100 GPUs [1] connected to each other by NVLink and
NVSwitch [2]. Each node has eight NVIDIA Mellanox 200Gbps HDR Infiniband HCAs for application
communication.

6.1    Memory Usage
Table 2 summarizes the required memory for different technique discussed in this paper. To quantify
this, Figure 7 shows the activation memory used by different techniques as a percentage of the memory
needed to keep all activations split across the tensor parallel ranks, i.e., Equation 2. Individually, both
techniques cut the memory requirement nearly in half, and combined provide a 5x reduction bringing
the memory requirements to under 20%. This is only ∼ 2× of the full activation recomputation which
is at 10% of the baseline. Without the memory savings provided by sequence parallelism and selective
recompute together, none of the these models will fit into memory. Note that all of these results include
the memory optimization described in Appendiex B.

6.2    Execution Time per Layer
Table 4 shows the time to execute the forward and backward passes of one transformer layer of the
22B model for various experiments4 . The first two rows show that sequence parallelism provides a
   4 These experiments were done on the 22B model with just one layer so that they would fit into device memory

without any recomputation to obtain a baseline.


                                                       10
Figure 7: Percentage of required memory compared to the tensor-level parallel baseline. As the model
size increases, both sequence parallelism and selective activation recomputation have similar memory
savings and together they reduce the memory required by ∼ 5×.


                Experiment     Forward (ms)     Backward (ms)     Combined (ms)      Overhead (%)
    Baseline no recompute          7.7              11.9              19.6                –
      Sequence Parallelism         7.2              11.8              19.0               −3%
   Baseline with recompute         7.7              19.5              27.2               39%
      Selective Recompute          7.7              13.2              20.9               7%
      Selective + Sequence         7.2              13.1              20.3               4%

Table 4: Time to complete the forward and backward pass of a single transformer layer of the 22B
model.


modest improvement to the time it takes to complete one transformer layer, reducing the forward time
from 7.7ms to 7.2ms, a 6% speedup. This improvement comes from the layer-norm and dropout layers
being performed on 1/t of the data. We also found that even though the amount of data moved is
the same, the execution of reduce-scatter and all-gather combined is slower than an all-reduce alone,
reducing the improvement from sequence parallelism. Note that this speedup is an additional benefit
to the primary advantage of using sequence parallelism, which is the memory savings that allow for
less recomputation of activations.
    The next two rows in Table 4 show that if we are selective in what operations are recomputed,
which we can be in more configurations thanks to sequence parallelism, we can significantly reduce the
overhead of recomputation in the backward pass. The overhead of selective recomputation is 1.3ms,
or 11% of the 11.9ms baseline, vs 7.6ms or 64% overhead for recomputing the full layer. For the
combined forward and backward time, the overhead is 7% vs 39%. Note that the overhead of 39% for
recomputing the full layer (as opposed to the expected 33%) is due to an optimization in the backward
pass where we overlap all-reduce communication with the linear weight’s gradient computation. As we
see later, this benefit increases with model size. The bottom row in Table 4 shows the combined benefit
of selective recomputation and sequence parallelism. When the two techniques are used together, the
overhead drops to just 4%.
    Figure 8 shows this same break down for all of our test cases. We see that as the model size grows,
the reduction in overhead also increases. For the 530B and 1T cases, the overhead is just 2%, compared
to 36% overhead for full recompute.

6.3    End-to-End Iteration Time
Table 5 lists full end-to-end iteration time for each of the four configurations listed in Table 3. We
find that for all of the tested configurations, the techniques presented in the paper provide between
29.0% and 32.1% improvement in the throughput over performing full recomputation without sequence


                                                  11
Figure 8: Per layer breakdown of forward, backward, and recompute times. Baseline is the case with
no recomputation and no sequence parallelism. Present work includes both sequence parallelism and
selective activation recomputation.

                   Iteration Time (seconds)          Throughput       Model FLOPs       Hardware FLOPs
 Model Size
               Full Recompute Present Work            Increase         Utilization         Utilization
     22B              1.42            1.10             29.0%             41.5%               43.7%
    175B             18.13            13.75            31.8%             51.4%               52.8%
    530B             49.05            37.83            29.7%             56.0%               57.0%
     1T              94.42            71.49            32.1%             56.3%               57.0%

  Table 5: End-to-end iteration time. Our approach results in throughput increase of around 30%.


parallelism. These savings will be directly translated into shorter training times.
    We define the model FLOPs utilization (MFU) and hardware FLOPs utilization (HFU) similar to
Chowdhery, et al. [6]. Model FLOPs are the floating point operations required to perform a single
forward and backward pass (single iteration) regardless of the implementations and hardware limi-
tations. As a result, model FLOPs are hardware and implementation independent and only depend
on the underlying model. On the other hand, the hardware FLOPs represent the floating point op-
erations that are actually performed on the hardware per iteration. Therefore, if an implementation
requires activation recomputation (for example ours), then the hardware FLOPs are going to be larger
than model FLOPs. We provide a tight lower bound formula for the model and hardware FLOPs in
Appendix A. For our method, the hardware to model FLOPs ratio is approximately 1 + s/6h.
    Subsequently, we define the model and hardware FLOPs per second as the model and hardware
FLOPs divided by the iteration time, respectively. Using these definitions, the MFU and HFU are
defined as model and hardware FLOPs per second divided by the accelerator theoretical peak FLOPs
per second5 . Both the MFU and HFU are provided in Table 5 for all four configurations. As the model
size increases, we achieve better GPU utilization and for the one trillion parameter model, we reach a
MFU and HFU of 56.3% and 57.0%, respectively.
    We should note that the results in Table 5 do not use any data parallelism. Data parallelism
  5 For NVIDIA A100 GPUs, the peak theoretical FLOPs per second is 312 teraFLOPs/sec.




                                                    12
introduces some overhead due to the gradient all-reduce required between the data parallel groups.
However, for large transformer models, this overhead is not large. For example, if we scale the 530B
model to 8-way data parallellism (2240 GPUs) while keeping batch size per model instance constant –
i.e., the batch size is also multiplied by the data parallel size – the time per iteration increases slightly
from 37.83 seconds to 39.15 seconds. This results in an MFU drop from 56.0% to 54.2% which is not
substantial. We note that we do not use any overlapping of gradient all-reduces with back-propagation
and an efficient overlap can almost entirely eliminate this increase in the iteration time.


7    Conclusions and Future Work
In this work, we presented two novel and straightforward techniques that reduce memory pressure
from storing activations and thus reduce the need to recompute activations. We showed that using se-
quence parallelism with tensor parallelism can substantially reduce the required activation memory. In
conjunction with selective activation recomputation, we showed that we can achieve a 5× reduction in
memory and recover over 90% of the compute overhead introduced using full activation recomputation.
   In the future, we plan to further reduce the activation memory by resolving the issues arising from
memory fragmentation for large microbatches and non-uniform memory allocation due to pipeline
parallelism. Moreover, we plan to work on methods that can reduce the memory pressure on the first
stage of the pipeline.


References
 [1] NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU. https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/a100/.
 [2] NVLink and nVSwitch. https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/nvlink/.
 [3] Selene. https://www.top500.org/system/179842/.
 [4] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
     wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
     Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
     Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
     Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
     Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle,
     Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information
     Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
 [5] Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
     memory cost. CoRR, abs/1604.06174, 2016.
 [6] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
     Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
     Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
     Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
     Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
     skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
     Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
     Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
     Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Re-
     won Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
     Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean,
     Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways, 2022.
 [7] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Xu Chen, Hy-
     oukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. Gpipe: Efficient train-
     ing of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
     Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances


                                                     13
    in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
    ing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages 103–112,
    2019.
 [8] Can Karakus, Rahul Huilgol, Fei Wu, Anirudh Subramanian, Cade Daniel, Derya Cavdar, Teng
     Xu, Haohan Chen, Arash Rahnama, and Luis Quintela. Amazon sagemaker model parallelism:
     A general and flexible framework for large model training, 2021.
 [9] Shenggui Li, Fuzhao Xue, Yongbin Li, and Yang You. Sequence parallelism: Long sequence
     training from system perspective, 2021.
[10] Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Shiyuan Guo, Danyang Zhuo, Hao Zhang, Dawn Song, and Ion
     Stoica. Terapipe: Token-level pipeline parallelism for training large-scale language models. In
     Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
     Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research, pages 6543–6552. PMLR, 2021.
[11] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil R. Devanur, Gre-
     gory R. Ganger, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Matei Zaharia. Pipedream: generalized pipeline paral-
     lelism for DNN training. In Tim Brecht and Carey Williamson, editors, Proceedings of the 27th
     ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2019, Huntsville, ON, Canada, October
     27-30, 2019, pages 1–15. ACM, 2019.
[12] Deepak Narayanan, Amar Phanishayee, Kaiyu Shi, Xie Chen, and Matei Zaharia. Memory-
     Efficient Pipeline-Parallel DNN Training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09503, 2020.
[13] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGresley, Mostofa Patwary,
     Vijay Anand Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catan-
     zaroand Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. Efficient large-scale language model training on
     gpu clusters using megatron-lm. ArXiv, abs/2104.04473, 2021.
[14] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: memory opti-
     mizations toward training trillion parameter models. In Christine Cuicchi, Irene Qualters, and
     William T. Kramer, editors, Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance
     Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2020, Virtual Event / Atlanta, Georgia, USA,
     November 9-19, 2020, page 20. IEEE/ACM, 2020.
[15] Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, Jeff Rasley, Shaden Smith, and Yuxiong He. Zero-infinity:
     breaking the GPU memory wall for extreme scale deep learning. In Bronis R. de Supinski, Mary W.
     Hall, and Todd Gamblin, editors, SC ’21: The International Conference for High Performance
     Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, November 14 - 19,
     2021, pages 59:1–59:14. ACM, 2021.
[16] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System opti-
     mizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Rajesh Gupta,
     Yan Liu, Jiliang Tang, and B. Aditya Prakash, editors, KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Con-
     ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23-27, 2020,
     pages 3505–3506. ACM, 2020.
[17] Jie Ren, Samyam Rajbhandari, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Olatunji Ruwase, Shuangyan Yang,
     Minjia Zhang, Dong Li, and Yuxiong He. Zero-offload: Democratizing billion-scale model train-
     ing. In Irina Calciu and Geoff Kuenning, editors, 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference,
     USENIX ATC 2021, July 14-16, 2021, pages 551–564. USENIX Association, 2021.
[18] Noam Shazeer, Youlong Cheng, Niki Parmar, Dustin Tran, Ashish Vaswani, Penporn Koanan-
     takool, Peter Hawkins, HyoukJoong Lee, Mingsheng Hong, Cliff Young, Ryan Sepassi, and
     Blake A. Hechtman. Mesh-tensorflow: Deep learning for supercomputers. In Samy Bengio,
     Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett,
     editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural
     Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada,
     pages 10435–10444, 2018.


                                                 14
[19] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan
     Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model paral-
     lelism. CoRR, abs/1909.08053, 2019.
[20] Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
     Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Rewon
     Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad Shoeybi, Yuxiong He,
     Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. Using deepspeed and megatron to
     train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model. arXiv, 2022.
[21] Yuanzhong Xu, HyoukJoong Lee, Dehao Chen, Blake A. Hechtman, Yanping Huang, Rahul Joshi,
     Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, Andy Ly, Marcello Maggioni, Ruoming Pang, Noam Shazeer,
     Shibo Wang, Tao Wang, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. GSPMD: general and scalable paral-
     lelization for ML computation graphs. CoRR, abs/2105.04663, 2021.


A     FLOPs Calculation
For FLOPs calculations, we follow the derivation from Narayanan, et.al.[13] and only consider the
matrix multiplications (GEMMs) which are the main contributors to the number of floating-point op-
erations. For the attention block, the main contributors to floating-point operations are: key, query,
and value transformation (6Bsh2 operations), attention matrix computation (2Bs2 h operations), at-
tention over values (2Bs2 h operations), and post-attention linear projection (2Bsh2 operations) where
B is the microbatch size.
   For the feed-forward network that increases the hidden size to 4h and then reduces it back to h,
we have 16Bsh2 floating-point operations. Summing these together, each transformer layer results in
24Bsh2 + 4Bs2 h FLOPs for the forward pass. The other main contributor to the number of floating-
point operations is the logits layer in the language model head, which transforms features of dimension
h to the vocabulary dimension v. The required FLOPs for this operation is 2Bshv.
   The backward pass requires double the number of FLOPs since we need to calculate the gradients
with respect to both input and weight tensors. Summing all the contributions, the number of FLOPs
required to do one forward and one backward pass (denoted by model FLOPs) is:
                                                                    s      v 
                      model FLOPs per iteration = 72BLsh2 1 +           +        .                  (7)
                                                                    6h 12hL
    Selective activation recomputation requires an additional forward pass attention matrix computa-
tion (2Bs2 h operations) and attention over values (2Bs2 h operations). Adding these required FLOPs
to Equation 7, the total number of FLOPs we require per iteration (denoted by hardware FLOPs) is:
                                                                    s      v 
                     hardware FLOPs per iteration = 72BLsh2 1 +         +         .              (8)
                                                                    3h 12hL
   One can see that in our approach, model FLOPs are very close to the hardware FLOPs. Assuming
3h  s and 12hL  v and only considering main terms, the ratio of the hardware to model FLOPs
can be approximated as:
                                    hardware FLOPs         s
                                                   ≈1+       .                              (9)
                                     model FLOPs          6h

B     Pipeline Parallelism Memory Optimization
As mentioned in Section 4.2.3, efficient pipeline parallelism strategies do not uniformly divide the total
memory across pipeline ranks. Figure 9 illustrates this memory pattern for the 530B model detailed
in Table 3, showing the memory imbalance across pipeline ranks for both an unoptimized case, and
when deallocating each microbatch’s output tensor after its forward pass. This optimization relies on
the fact that, after a microbatch’s forward pass, the output tensor’s data is redundant with the input
data of the following stage, thereby making it safe to deallocate. We should note that in all other
results shown in this paper, this output-tensor-deallocation optimization is used.




                                                   15
Figure 9: Activation memory of each pipeline parallel rank, shown for both an unoptimized case (blue),
and with our memory optimization that deallocates the output tensor of each pipeline rank (yellow).
The 530B model (see Table 3) is used for this experiment.



    In this figure, we can observe the linear memory decrease along the pipeline ranks (directly observ-
able for pipeline ranks 1 and above), along with the additional sbhp memory spike on pipeline rank 0
due to the embedding layer’s activation memory (see Section 4.3).
    In the case of applying the output-tensor-deallocation optimization, we save sbhr memory per
pipeline rank, where r is the number of microbatches in flight on each rank, peaking at r = p on the
first pipeline stage. Using the hyperparameters for the 530B model (see Table 3), and this setup’s
2 bytes per data element, the theoretical savings for this optimization on the first pipeline stage is
sbhp = 2.73 GB, which closely matches the difference between the lines shown in the figure for rank 0.


C     Microbatch Level Activation Recomputation
GPUs used in pipeline parallel model training store the input activations of layers until they are
consumed at the gradient computation during back-propagation. As discussed in Section 4.2.3, the first
pipeline stage stores the most activations, an equivalent of storing activations for all of the transformer
layers in the model.
    The computation and memory usage patterns of the first pipeline stage are illustrated in Figure 10.
Yellow, red, and blue boxes indicate the execution of forward, recomputation, and back-propagation of
one microbatch, respectively. This example uses the pipeline-parallel size of four and nine microbatches
per iteration for training. Here the recomputation can be either full or selective. Figure 10.a depicts
the execution flow of the baseline approach. Although there is some GPU memory left unused, if it is
not large enough to store all of the activations and thus not require any recomputation, the activations
of every microbatch is checkpointed and recomputed during back-propagation.
    Microbatch level activation recomputation uses all the available device memory to store activations
of some outstanding microbatches, and checkpoint the rest until the backpropagation frees enough
memory to store another full layer of activations. We skip checkpointing microbatches (i.e. store all
their activation) until all device memory is used. In Figure 10.b, the activations of the first microbatch
are stored out of four microbatches. Once the activations of the first microbatch are consumed by
the its back-propagation, enough memory is now free to store all activations of the fifth microbatch.
This can be seen as a moving window of microbatches in which a certain number of them can have all
activations stored.
    Later pipeline stages have fewer outstanding backpropagation steps thus we can save all activations
for the same number of microbatches within a smaller microbatch window. The size of outstanding
microbatch backpropagation steps at each pipeline stage is calculated as max(0, p − S), where S is the
stage number. Based on our observations, many of later pipeline stages do not need any activation
recomputation.


                                                    16
    (a) Baseline

                                      GPU memory unused
 GPU Memory
              Memory allocated




              1 2 3 4            1    1     5 2     2     6 3     3     7 4      4       8 5   5     9 6   6       7   7       8   8   9   9



    (b) Skip checkpointing micro-batches out of the outstanding micro-batch back-propagation steps
 GPU Memory




              Memory allocated


                                      Skip activation checkpoint



                                                                                                                                           Forward prop
              1 2 3 4             1       5 2   2       6 3   3       7 4   4        8   5     9 6   6     7   7       8   8       9        Recompute
                                                                                                                                             Backprop


                Skip checkpointing the activation of 1 micro-batch out of each 4 micro-batch window



Figure 10: Computation and memory usage patterns of the baseline activation recomputation and
microbatch level activation recomputation. Yellow boxes are a forward pass with activations check-
pointed (i.e. only some activations are saved), red boxes are activation recomputation, blue boxes are
backpropagation, and white boxes are a foward pass with all activations saved.



    Microbatch level activation recomputation increases the model FLOPs utilization of the 175B and
530B parameter models to 52.3% (+0.7%) and 56.4% (+0.4%), respectively, compared to the baseline
with both sequence parallelism and selective activation recomputation. The gain is small because
the selective recomputation overhead is as small as ∼2%. However, one can imagine model parallel
configurations where there is nearly enough memory for no recomputation, in which case microbatch
level activation recomputation could provide more improvement to training speed.




                                                                            17
