Huawei announces computing strategy and releases Atlas 900, the world's fastest AI training cluster - Huawei
기업 홈페이지 한국 (언어 전환)
메인메뉴로 가기
기업 홈페이지
컨슈머 비즈니스
엔터프라이즈 비즈니스
네트워크 비즈니스
클라우드&AI 비즈니스
디지털 파워 비즈니스
메인메뉴로 가기
국가 또는 지역 선택
Australia - English
Brazil - Português
China - 简体中文
Europe - English
France - Français
Germany - Deutsch
Ireland - English
Italy - Italiano
Japan - 日本語
Kazakhstan - Қазақ тілі
Kazakhstan - Pусский
Kenya - English
Korea - 한국어
Malaysia - English
Mexico - Español
Mongolia - Mонгол
New Zealand - English
Netherlands - Nederlands
Poland - Polski
Romania - Română
Singapore - English
South Africa - English
Spain - Español
Switzerland - Deutsch
Switzerland - Français
Switzerland - Italiano
Switzerland - English
Tanzania - English
Thailand - ภาษาไทย
Turkiye - Türkçe
Ukraine - Українська
United Kingdom - English
Uzbekistan - Pусский
Uzbekistan - O’zbek
Vietnam - Tiếng Việt
Global - English
Toggle Navigation
컨슈머
메인메뉴로 가기
엔터프라이즈
메인메뉴로 가기
엔터프라이즈 비즈니스
통신사 네트워크 비즈니스
클라우드 비즈니스
디지털 파워 비즈니스
화웨이 소개
메인메뉴로 가기
화웨이 소개
화웨이 소개
회사 소개
연간 보고서
문의하기
지속 가능 경영
사이버 보안 센터
채권투자자
공공 정책
뉴스 및 이벤트
뉴스
인사이트
한국화웨이 블로그
당사는 당사 사이트 및 사용자 경험을 개선하는 쿠키를 사용합니다. 당사 사이트를 계속 탐색하시면 쿠키 정책에 동의하는 것입니다. 자세히 보기
뉴스 및 이벤트
뉴스
이벤트
Huawei announces computing strategy and releases Atlas 900, the world's fastest AI training cluster
[Shanghai, China, September 18, 2019] At HUAWEI CONNECT 2019, Huawei announced its strategy for the computing market and released Atlas 900, the world's fastest AI training cluster. A powerhouse of AI computing, Atlas 900 will help make AI more readily available for different fields of scientific research and business innovation.
Ken Hu outlines Huawei’s computing strategy in his keynote at HUAWEI CONNECT 2019
"The future of computing is a massive market worth more than two trillion US dollars," said Ken Hu, Huawei's Deputy Chairman. "We'll keep investing with a strategy that focuses on four key areas. We will push the boundaries of architecture, invest in processors for all scenarios, keep clear business boundaries, and build an open ecosystem."
Huawei's computing strategy
The industry's approach to computing is evolving from rule-based to statistical models, which are the foundation of machine learning. Huawei estimates that in the next five years, statistical computing will become the mainstream and AI computing will account for more than 80% of all computing power used around the world.
To carve out a place in this market, Huawei's strategy will focus on four key areas:
Architecture innovation. Last year Huawei launched the Da Vinci architecture, an innovative processor architecture designed to provide a steady and abundant supply of affordable computing power. Huawei will continue to invest in basic research.
Investment in all-scenario processors. Huawei has a full lineup of processors: Kunpeng processors for general purpose computing, Ascend processors for AI, Kirin processors for smart devices, and Honghu processors for smart screens.
Clear business boundaries. Huawei won't sell its processors directly. Instead, it will provide them to its customers in the form of cloud services, and to its partners in the form of components, prioritizing support for integrated solutions.
Building an open ecosystem. In the next five years, Huawei will invest another US$1.5 billion in its developer program. The aim is to expand the program to support five million developers and enable Huawei's worldwide partners to develop the next generation of intelligent applications and solutions.
Atlas 900, the world's fastest AI training cluster
Building on the technical strengths that Huawei has developed over the past decade, Atlas 900 combines the power of thousands of Ascend processors. It takes Atlas 900 only 59.8 seconds to train ResNet-50, the gold standard for measuring AI training performance. This is 10 seconds faster than the previous world record.
Atlas 900 is a powerhouse of AI computing, and it will bring new possibilities to different fields of scientific research and business innovation – anything from astronomy, weather forecasting, and autonomous driving, to oil exploration. Huawei also deployed Atlas 900 on Huawei Cloud as a cluster service, making extraordinary computing power more broadly accessible to its customers across different industries. Huawei has offered these services at a great discount to universities and scientific research institutes worldwide.
Gao Wen, a Member of Chinese Academy of Engineering and Director of Peng Cheng Lab, also spoke at this year's event. He shared the mission and vision of Peng Cheng Lab and how the organization will work with Huawei to build China's first evolving AI supercomputing system that supports exascale computing. The two companies will work together to establish a new generation of platforms for AI basic research and innovation.
Zheng Yelai, President of Huawei's Cloud BU, talked about how AI can be applied in different scenarios. Based on Huawei's experience in over 500 projects across more than 10 industries, Zheng pointed out that industry AI is crossing the commercial chasm and becoming the key driver for reshaping how companies go digital.
"This is a new age of exploration," Ken Hu concluded. "An ocean of boundless potential is waiting, but just one ship won't cut it. Today we launch a thousand ships. Let's work together, seize this historic opportunity, and advance intelligence to new heights."
HUAWEI CONNECT 2019 is an annual flagship event hosted by Huawei for the global ICT industry, and is held in Shanghai from September 18 to 20, 2019. This year’s Conference is themed on "Advance Intelligence" and aims to establish an open, cooperative, and shared platform for customers and partners to explore new opportunities for an intelligent future.
For more information, please visit: Link
Read Ken Hu’s keynote script here : blog.huawei.com/2019/09/18/advance-intelligence-building-a-fully-connected-intelligent-world/
© @year Huawei
문의
법적고지
개인정보처리방침