       Meet CS-4



The Fastest AI Just
    Got Faster
  Up to 30x Faster than GPU
The Fastest AI Just Got Faster.

Cerebras CS-4 is the fastest AI accelerator in the industry. The CS-4 is a rack-

scale solution built from three new Wafer Scale Engine 3 Turbo processors and

a revolutionary rack and system design. CS-4 delivers up to 30x faster inference

compared to GPUs, better economics, and a simple path to deploy hyperscale

capacity. It is the ideal architecture for frontier AI.




Up To 30X Faster than GPUs


Up to 30x faster than GPUs and twice as fast as the CS-3, CS-4’s

more powerful processor and rack design enables a better

experience for highly interactive, agentic, and reasoning

workloads.




Higher Ultrafast Throughput


The CS-4 solution delivers up to 10x throughput per watt

compared to the CS-3, vastly improving datacenter economics.

CS-4 delivers both higher-value fast tokens and more total

tokens within a given power budget – enabling higher profitability

for your AI data center.




Modular Rack Design Built for Hyperscale


CS-4's modular rack design, with 50% fewer components and

self-contained assemblies for compute, power, and I/O, enables

faster manufacturing and rapid deployments in hyperscale

datacenters. The modularity also enables independent

innovation across compute, power, and I/O modules.




                                        Engineered for Speed at Scale




          WSE-3 Turbo                               Faster Wafer I/O           Nexus Rack-Scale
  Delivers up to twice the speed of              Scales massive models and
                                                                                  Platform
   the WSE-3 – the new fastest in                  enables heterogeneous,    Enables rapid deployment in

             the industry                         disaggregated inference     hyperscale data centers
Up to 30X Faster Than GPUs
Powered by WSE-Turbo, CS-4 delivers up to 30x faster inference
compared to GPU systems, setting a new record for the fastest inference
available in production.




                                                                           1000 Tokens per Seconds for 
                                                                           10T Models and Beyond
                                                                           By reducing wafer-to-wafer interconnect latency to 2 microseconds, CS-4
                                                                           delivers more than 1,000 tokens per second on models exceeding 10 trillion
                                                                           parameters, preserving interactive decode performance at unprecedented
                                                                           scale.




Higher Ultrafast Throughput
The CS-4 solution shifts the inference Pareto frontier, delivering up to
10x more throughput per watt than CS-3 while generating tokens up
to 30x faster than production GPU systems.. The result is a system
designed to deliver both throughput and interactivity. Data center
operators can generate more total tokens—and more high-value fast
tokens—within the same power budget, vastly improving data center
economics.




                                                                           Native Support for 
                                                                           Disaggregated Inference
                                                                           CS-4 pairs purpose-built prefill engines with ultra-low-latency Cerebras
                                                                           decoding, enabling flexible disaggregated inference across platforms
                                                                           including AMD Helios and AWS Trainium.
The Nexus Rack-Scale Platform – 
a Modular Rack Design to Enable Faster
Deployments
CS-4 is the first iteration of the new Cerebras Nexus Platform Architecture. It
is built around a modular concept with three foundational elements:
compute, power, and I/O. The Nexus Platform brings significant innovation
to each element. Modularity supports extremely rapid deployment and
upgrades, as well as the ability for each element to scale independently so
innovations get to market faster.




                                                                                  Pluggable Compute Backpack Design
                                                                                  Cerebras has fundamentally re-imagined the compute subsystem into a
                                                                                  rear mounted “backpack” that attaches vertically to the power array. Each
                                                                                  Wafer-Scale Backpack is a self-contained assembly that folds power
                                                                                  conversion, direct liquid cooling, high-speed I/O, and control electronics into
                                                                                  a compact, three-dimensional package built directly around the wafer. By
                                                                                  decoupling compute from the power supplies, the Wafer-Scale Backpack
                                                                                  simplifies manufacturing and reduces deployment time from days to hours.
                                                                                  Compared with the prior-generation system, the Wafer-Scale Backpack
                                                                                  has 50% fewer components and uses 60% more automated
                                                                                  manufacturing.




High Density Power Delivery
The Nexus Platform Architecture drives significant power delivery
improvements. With power delivery just 0.5 millimeters away from the
processor - approximately 100x closer than the roughly 50 mm of
conventional GPU boards - CS-4 nearly eliminates board-level power loss.
This enables the delivery of twice as much power to the WSE-3T, enabling
higher operating frequencies and faster token generation.




                                                                                  New Modular IO Subsystem
                                                                                  CS-4 introduces a new programmable I/O subsystem that doubles I/O
                                                                                  bandwidth while slashing latency.

                                                                                  The new Wafer I/O Module doubles I/O bandwidth and supports two
                                                                                  connectivity modes: standards-based RoCE v2 RDMA over Ethernet for
                                                                                  seamless integration with an ecosystem of heterogeneous systems, and
                                                                                  Direct Wafer Links for switch-free connections within and across racks.
                                                                                  Direct Wafer Links delivers wafer-to-wafer latency as low as 2
                                                                                  microseconds, enabling massive CS-4 clusters to serve frontier AI models at
                                                                                  over 1000 tokens per second.
CS-4 Specifications


       CS-4 SYSTEM

       Architecture                      Active power rack with three modular compute backpacks

       Wafer Scale Engines               3 × WSE-3 Turbos per system

       AI Compute                        750 PFLOPS*

       Memory Bandwidth                  129.6 PB/s

       On-chip Fabric Bandwidth          160.5 PB/s

       I/O Bandwidth                     7.2 Tbit/s

       I/O latency                       2 microseconds


       WSE-3 Turbo (PER WAFER)

       Transistors / Silicon              4 trillion transistors; 46,225 mm²; TSMC 5 nm

       AI Cores / On-Chip SRAM            900,000 cores; 44 GB SRAM

       AI Compute                         250 PFLOPS*

       Memory Bandwidth                   43.2 PB/s

       On-Chip Fabric Bandwidth           53.5 PB/s

       I/O Bandwidth                      2.4 Tbit/s



      *A compute shown as sparse FP16.
        I




Learn more about Cerebras CS-4 at cerebras.ai/system
