WHITE PAPER

The Cerebras Wafer-
Scale Architecture for
Deep Learning

Abstract 

The compute and memory demands for deep learning and machine
learning (ML) have increased by several orders of magnitude in just the
last couple of years, and there is no end in sight. Traditional improvements
in processor performance alone struggle to keep up with the exponential
demand. A new chip architecture co-designed with the ML algorithms can
be better equipped to satisfy this unprecedented demand and enable the
ML workloads of the future. 

This article describes the Cerebras architecture and how it is designed
specifically with this purpose, from the ground up, as a wafer-sized chip to
enable emerging extreme-scale ML models. It uses fine-grained data flow
compute cores to accelerate unstructured sparsity, distributed static
random-access memory for full memory bandwidth to the data paths, and
a specially designed on-chip and off-chip interconnect for ML training.
With these techniques, the Cerebras architecture provides unique
capabilities beyond traditional designs.




Sean Lie, Co-Founder and CTO, Cerebras Systems.




cerebras.ai
               The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                Page 2




Table of Contents

Overview


  Core Architecture


  Scale-up: Amplifying Moore’s Law


  Conclusion
                                   The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning


                                                                                                                  Page 3




The field of modern machine learning (ML) is relatively new, and we are already reaching a pace that is


often limited by traditional approaches to training and inference. In 2018, state-of-the-art neural


networks such as BERT had 100 million parameters. Two years later, the famous GPT-3 had 175 billion


parameters. There is no end in sight, with the latest state-of-the-art models from OpenAI and


Anthropic estimated to be in the trillions of parameters, and popular open-weight models like


DeepSeek R1 reaching 671 billion parameters. 






This is the grand ML demand challenge in front of the industry. At Cerebras, we believe that we can


meet this unprecedented demand. We cannot do it by relying on just a single solution. It must be


addressed by making substantial improvements—by an order of magnitude or more—across a broad


spectrum of multiple different components. To meet this unprecedented demand, we target order-of-


magnitude improvements in three key areas: core architecture, scale-up, and scale-out. We believe all


of these are required to keep up with this unprecedented demand. To achieve improvements in all


three areas, our architecture is co-designed from the ground up specifically for neural networks. In the


following sections, we describe each area in detail.




Overview


The foundation of the Cerebras architecture is the first-ever wafer-sized processor chip, called the


wafer-scale engine (WSE), which was released in 2019. The third-generation WSE-3 was released in


2024 and is focus of this article. It is the largest processor ever built, at 46,225 mm² in size and


containing over 4 trillion transistors. Surrounding each WSE-3 is a custom-built system called the


CS-3. Within each CS-3 and WSE-3, a wafer-scale on-chip fabric connects 900,000 cores that are


specifically designed for ML workloads. In contrast to traditional processors, the Cerebras core uses


fine-grained data flow to accelerate unstructured sparsity, which makes it particularly well suited for


neural networks, which often have natural sparsity or can be sparsified. Memory is entirely distributed


static random-access memory (SRAM) instead of dynamic RAM (DRAM) to provide full memory


bandwidth to every core's data path. With so many cores and sparsity acceleration, many large ML


models can be solved with a single WSE-3 alone. However, to address emerging extreme-scale ML


models, the Cerebras architecture uses an off-chip fabric to extend to a cluster of CS-3 systems. The


cluster architecture leverages the scale of each CS-3 to provide simple data parallel-only scaling to


the larger models and larger clusters.




                      Memory and compute requirements for various state-of-the-art neural networks on a log–log


                                      scale. PFLOP: peta-floating-point operations per second.
                                  The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                   Page 4



Core Architecture
The core is specially designed for the fine-grained dynamic sparsity in neural networks. It is a small-
core design, at approximately 38,000 µm² of silicon area in the TSMC 5 nm process. Half of the silicon
area is used by 48 kB of memory. The other half is logic, made up of 110,000 standard cells. 



Traditional memory architectures in modern processors use shared central DRAM, but DRAM is both
relatively slow and far away when compared to the compute performance. Even with advanced
techniques like high-bandwidth memory (HBM3), the relative bandwidth from memory is significantly
lower than the core data path bandwidth. For example, it is common for GPU compute data paths to
have 100 times more bandwidth than DRAM memory bandwidth. This means each operand from a
memory must be used at least 100 times in the data path to keep utilization high. The traditional way to
handle this is by using data reuse through local caching or local registers and accumulators. 



Instead of the traditional approach, the Cerebras architecture provides full memory bandwidth to all
data paths at full performance, removing the need for data reuse. This is accomplished by fully
distributing the memory right next to where it is used, which enables memory bandwidth that is equal
to the operand bandwidth of the core data path. Driving the bits only tens of microns from local
memory to the data path, all on silicon, is much easier than through a package to an external device.




                   The Cerebras core physical design: 50% of the area is static random-access memory (SRAM) and
                                                       50% of the area is logic.

Each small core has 48 kB of local SRAM dedicated to the core. That memory is designed to optimize
density while providing full performance to the data path: 192-bit access per cycle from two 64-bit
reads and one 64-bit write. With that organization, there is 256-bit access per cycle providing more raw
memory bandwidth than the data path. The 32-bit bank size was chosen to achieve high density while
minimizing bank conflicts in typical ML workloads. It is important to note that all of the memory is
independently addressed per core. There is no shared memory in the traditional sense. To enable truly
scalable memory, all of the sharing between cores is done explicitly through the fabric. In addition to
the high-performance SRAM, there is also a small 256-B software-managed cache that is used for
frequently accessed data structures, such as accumulators. This cache is designed to be physically
very compact and close to the data path to minimize power for these frequent accesses.



The SRAM uses 50% of the die area, which is in line with the area used for traditional caches, register
files, and memory controllers in CPU or GPU designs. Per unit area, our SRAM memory design is higher
density than traditional caches because it is not a cache; it does not have overhead such as
multiporting, tagging, and cache management logic. Additionally, by not using DRAM, our design also
does not incur the die area and power of double data rate or HBM memory controllers. The most
significant tradeoff of using SRAM instead of DRAM is in capacity because SRAM density is lower than
that of DRAM. The wafer-scale integration is used to make up the capacity to achieve DRAM equivalent
                                   The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                    Page 5



capacity per chip. With this distributed memory architecture and DRAM equivalent capacity, the
design can be considered an in-memory compute architecture that achieves significantly higher
aggregate memory bandwidth than traditional shared DRAM memory architectures. Normalizing to the
GPU area, the Cerebras memory bandwidth is approximately 200 times higher within the same silicon
area, directly to the data paths.



With such high memory bandwidth, the design is capable of running matrix operations out of memory
at full performance across all BLAS levels. Traditional CPU and GPU architectures with limited off-chip
memory bandwidth are limited to running only general matrix–matrix multiply (GEMM) operations at
full performance. Any BLAS level below full GEMM requires a large jump in memory bandwidth because
there is less data reuse. This becomes challenging with traditional architectures, but with enough
memory bandwidth, we can enable full performance all the way down to vector–scalar multiply (AXPY).
Within neural network computation, this capability is important because it enables fully unstructured
sparsity acceleration.




                   BLAS levels of linear algebra computation and memory bandwidth requirements for FP16 flops (1
                   MAC = 2 flops). Note that Sparse-GEMM is comprised of one AXPY per nonzero matrix element.
                    AXPY: vector–scalar multiply; BLAS: basic linear algebra subroutine; GEMM: general matrix–
                    matrix; MAC: multiply–accumulate; FP16: floating point 16 bit; GEMM: general matrix-matrix
                                  multiply; GEMV: general matrix-vector multiply; DOT: dot product.

Programmability

The foundation of the Cerebras core is a fully general processor that can be programmed to adapt to
the changing field of ML. Like any general-purpose processor, it supports a full set of general-purpose
instructions that include arithmetic, logical, load/store, compare, and branch instructions. These
instructions are fully local to each core, stored in the same 48 kB of local memory as the data. This is
important because it means that every core is independent, which enables very fine-grained, dynamic
computation globally across the entire chip. These general-purpose instructions operate on 16
general-purpose registers, and they run in a compact six-stage pipeline. For ML workloads, all
instructions are statically loaded upfront using a configuration interface, and they do not change
during execution. Given that the same instructions are reused repeatedly (which could be millions of
times in neural network training), the time to load the instructions does not appreciably impact overall
performance.



On top of this general-purpose foundation, there is hardware support for tensor instructions that are
intended for all data processing. These tensor operations execute on the underlying data path, which
in CS-3 is made up of 8-wide FP16 SIMD units per core, a 2× increase over CS-2. The FMAC accumulator
optionally supports either the native 16-bit format or FP32 data type. To optimize for performance and
flexibility, the instruction set architecture has tensors as first-class operands, just like general-
purpose registers or memory.
                                         The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning


                                                                                                                                            Page 6




The core uses data structure registers (DSRs) as operands to the instructions. Our core has 44 of


these DSRs, each of which contains a descriptor with a pointer to the tensor and other key


information, such as length, shape, and size of that tensor. With these DSRs, the hardware


architecture is flexible enough to natively support up to 4-D tensors that are in memory; fabric-


streaming tensors; first-in, first-out buffers; or circular buffers. Behind the scenes, there are hardware


state machines that use the DSRs and sequence through the full tensor at full performance on the


data path. Instructions for each individual core are generated by the Cerebras software stack and


compiler, which lowers ML programs from frameworks, such as TensorFlow or PyTorch.






On top of these tensor operations, the core uses fine-grained data flow scheduling. All computation is


triggered by the data. The fabric transports both the data and the associative control directly in the


hardware. Once the cores receive that data, the hardware triggers a lookup of instructions to run. That


lookup is entirely based on what is received in the fabric. With this data flow mechanism in the cores,


the entire compute fabric is a data flow engine. This enables native sparsity acceleration because it


only performs work on nonzero data. We filter out all of the zero data at the sender, so the receiver


does not even see it. Only nonzero data are sent, and that is what triggers all of the computation. Not


only do we save power by not performing the wasted compute, but we get acceleration by skipping it


and moving on to the next useful compute. Since the operations are triggered by single data elements,


this accelerates fine-grained fully unstructured sparsity.






To complement the dynamic nature of data flow, the core also supports eight simultaneous tensor


operations, which we call microthreads. These are independent tensor contexts that the hardware can


switch between on a cycle-by-cycle basis. The scheduler is continuously monitoring the input and the


output availability for all of the tensors that are being processed, and it picks an eligible microthread


with all of its resources available. Each microthread is also assigned a priority, so, if multiple


microthreads are eligible to run, the scheduler will pick the higher priority microthread. Each


microthread has full access to all resources, including registers and memory in the core, without any


static partitioning. As with instructions, each core has its own independent microthreads, so context


switching is entirely independent per core, enabling it to drive up utilization during dynamic behavior


by switching to other tasks independently when there would otherwise be bubbles in the pipeline.






With this fine-grained, dynamic, small-core architecture, we can achieve high compute performance—


as high as 10× more utilization than GPUs on unstructured, sparse compute or, potentially, even more


with higher sparsity. Coming back to the grand challenge, this sparse utilization advantage is how we


target an order-of-magnitude improvement from the core architecture.




                 Core data path and data flow scheduling to enable acceleration of fine-grained dynamic unstructured sparsity.



             (Top) Control information from the fabric triggers the core tolook up the operation and associated tensor information. 



            (Bottom) The data from the fabric is used directly by the data path to perform the computation, as directed by the control. 



                                    Ctrl: control; DSR: data structure register; GPR: general purpose register.
                               The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                Page 7




Scale-up: Amplifying Moore’s Law
Traditionally, scaling up within a chip has been the domain of semiconductor foundries. Moore's law
has carried the industry for decades, enabling denser and larger chips. Today, Moore's law continues to
improve chip scale but only by relatively incremental gains, on the order of 2× improvement per process
generation, which, alone, is not enough to satisfy the ML demand. Within the Cerebras architecture,
our design goal is to amplify Moore's law and get improvement by an order of magnitude or more.



The traditional way to amplify Moore's law is to make larger chips. We did that with wafer-scale
integration, and the result is the WSE-3 fabricated on the TSMC 5nm process. The WSE-3 is the largest
chip ever built, at 57× larger than the largest GPU today. It is 46,225 mm² in size, with over 4 trillion
transistors on a single chip, and it contains 900,000 cores. With all of those cores integrated on a
single piece of silicon, the single chip has 21 PB/s of memory bandwidth and 214 Pb/s of fabric
bandwidth.



We built a specially designed system around the WSE-3, called the CS-3. The system was co-designed
around the WSE-3, enabling the wafer-scale chip to be used in a standard data center environment.



To build up to wafer from the small cores, first we create a traditional die with 10,000 cores each.
Instead of cutting up the die to make traditional small chips, we keep it intact, but we carve out the
largest square within the round 300-mm wafer. The final chip contains a total of 84 dies, with 900,000
cores, all on a single chip.




                              Scaling from small core to entire wafer. WSE: wafer-scale engine.



High-Bandwidth, Low-Latency Fabric

The wafer-sized chip is only possible if the underlying architecture can scale to that extreme size. The
fundamental enabler is the fabric. It needs to enable efficient and high-performance communication
across the entire wafer. Our fabric does this by using a 2-D mesh topology, that is well suited to scale
on silicon with extremely low overhead. This fabric ties together all of the cores, where each core has a
fabric router within the mesh topology. The fabric routers have a simple five-port design, with 32-bit
bidirectional interfaces in each of the four cardinal directions and one port facing the core itself. Each
router uses lossless flow control with low buffering. This design enables single clock cycle latency
between nodes while remaining relatively low cost in terms of silicon area and power.
                                        The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                         Page 8



The fundamental data packet is a single 16-bit data element (FP16 or BF16) optimized for neural
network training. Along with those 16-bit data, there are 16 bits of control information, making up a 32-
bit fine-grained packet. To optimize the fabric design further, it uses entirely static routing, which is
efficient and has low overhead while matching to the requirements of neural network static
connections. To enable multiple routes on the same physical link, each core has 24 local static routes
that can be configured, called colors. All of the colors are nonblocking between one another, and they
are all time-multiplexed onto the same physical links. Globally, these local independent colors are
combined to support a large number of total routes throughout the entire core array. Additionally, each
color is used for a variety of different data and control communications, so the fixed 24 colors enable
far more different messages or tasks in total. Finally, neural network communication inherently has a
high degree of fan-out, so our fabric is designed with native broadcast and multicast capabilities
within each fabric router.




             High-bandwidth, low-latency fabric. There is a five-port fabric router in each core that has dedicated buffers for each
                                                     statically configured route (color).



To scale this fabric, we simply extend it out physically in both the x- and y-dimensions. Scaling within a
single die is simple. To scale beyond the die, we extend the fabric across die boundaries. The fabric
crosses less than a millimeter of scribe line using high-level metal layers within the TSMC process. This
extends the 2-D mesh compute fabric to a fully homogeneous array of cores across the entire wafer.
The die-to-die interface is an efficient, source-synchronous, parallel interface. Each interface has only
a few short wires in high-level metal, making it highly resilient to defects. However, at the wafer scale,
all interfaces add up to more than 1 million wires, so defects are unavoidable, and redundancy must be
built directly into the underlying protocol. We do that with auto-correction state machines that
automatically use redundant links when errors are discovered by training and error detection.
Therefore, even with inevitable localized defects in the fabrication process, most die-to-die interfaces
remain functional.
                                       The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                        Page 9



                     Area 
                    Bandwidth 
              Bandwidth 
               Power 
                  Power 

                     (mm²)                     (TB/s)                   (GB/s/mm²)                (pJ/bit)                 (W)

 GPU Estimate        826                       0.6                      0.7                       10                       60

 WSE-3 Sub-          826                       4.3                      5.2                       0.15                     6
 fabric

 Ratio               -                         7X                       7X                        66X                      10X

                 Comparison of on-wafer fabric interconnect to traditional interconnect in terms of raw bandwidth and power.



These simple short wires are the key enabler of efficient scale-up because they span less than a
millimeter of distance on silicon. When compared to traditional serializer/deserializer (SERDES)
communication, the difference is significant. The physical properties mean that driving bits less than a
millimeter on the chip is much easier than across package connectors, printed circuit boards, and
sometimes even cables. The result is an orders-of-magnitude improvement compared to traditional
input–output (IO). The on-wafer fabric achieves about an order of magnitude more bandwidth per unit
area and almost two orders of magnitude better power efficiency per bit. All of these results translate
into on-chip-level fabric performance across the entire wafer.

Weight Streaming Enables the Largest Models

The fabric enables the execution of extremely large neural networks all on a single chip. The WSE-3 has
enough performance and capacity to run even the largest state-of-the-art models without
partitioning or complex model parallel distribution. This is done by disaggregating the neural network
model, the weight memory, from the compute. We store all of the model weights externally in a device
called MemoryX, and we stream all of the weights onto the CS-3 system as they are needed to
compute each layer of the network, one layer at a time. Weights are stored in DRAM and flash memory
in MemoryX and streamed into the CS-3 at its full IO bandwidth. The weights are never stored on the
CS-3 system, not even temporarily, because the CS-3 performs the computation using the underlying
data flow mechanisms in the cores.




                   Weight streaming disaggregates model weights from compute to enable all model sizes on a single chip. 

              The model (on the left) weights are stored in the external MemoryX unit (shown as colors) and streamed to the CS-3
                                                                      system.
                                       The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning
                                                                                        Page 10


Using data flow scheduling, each individual weight triggers the computation as an individual AXPY
operation on a batch of activations resident on the wafer memory. Once each weight is complete, it is
discarded, and the hardware moves on to the next weight without ever storing the weight on the chip.
Since the weights are never stored, the size of the model is not constrained by the memory capacity on
chip. To amortize the cost of streaming each weight from the external MemoryX, each weight is
natively reused multiple times on the CS-3 by using it for a batch of activations. On the backward pass,
the gradients are streamed out in the reverse direction back to the MemoryX unit, where the weight
updates happen.

Wafer Matrix-Multiply (MatMul) Array

Neural network layers are composed of matrix multiplication. Because of the scale of the WSE-3, we
can use all 900,000 cores of the wafer as a single giant MatMul array. For transformer models like GPT,
for example, activation tensors have three logical dimensions: batch, sequence, and hidden
dimension. We split these tensor dimensions over the 2-D grid of cores on the wafer. The hidden
dimension is split over the fabric in the x-direction, and the batch and sequence dimensions are split
over the fabric's y-direction. This arrangement allows for efficient weight broadcast and reductions
over the sequence and hidden dimensions.




            Logical tensor distribution onto the physical wafer matrix-multiply (MatMul) array. The hidden (H) dimension is split

            over the fabric in the x-direction, and the batch (B) and sequence (S) dimensions are split over the fabric’s y-direction.




                                               Weight broadcast across the wafer MatMul array.
                                       The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning


                                                                                                                                     Page 11




               Sparse-GEMM computation on the wafer MatMul array. (Top) The weights trigger the AXPY operations using the



            data flow scheduling mechanism. (Bottom) The partial sums are accumulated in a ring and distributed across the fabric.




With activations stored on the cores where the work will be performed, the next step is to trigger the


computation on those activations. This is done by using the on-chip broadcast fabric to send the


weights, the data, and the commands to each column. Using the hardware data flow mechanisms, the


weights then trigger the FMAC operations directly. Since the broadcast occurs over columns, all cores


containing the same subset of hidden dimension features receive the same weights. Additionally, we


send commands to trigger other computations, such as reductions or nonlinear operations.






More specifically, the MatMul operation starts by broadcasting the first row of weights across the


wafer. Within that row, there are multiple weights that map onto a single column. When there is


sparsity, only those nonzero weights are broadcasted to the column, triggering FMAC computations


only for dense weights. We skip all the zero weights, and we stream in the next nonzero weight. This


technique is what produces a sparsity acceleration.






This operation uses several key properties of the core architecture. When a weight arrives, using the


hardware data flow scheduling of the core, it triggers an FMAC operation on the data path. The weight


value is multiplied with each of the activations already in SRAM memory and added into a local


accumulator in the software-managed cache. The series of multiple FMACs is performed using a single


tensor instruction with the activations as a tensor operand. All of these operations are done without


additional overhead on the core. Additionally, there is no memory capacity overhead for the weights


since, once the compute is done, the core moves on to the next weight, never storing any of the
                                The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning


                                                                                                   Page 12




weights. Once all weights for the row have been received, each core contains a partial sum that needs


to be reduced across the row of cores.






accumulator in the software-managed cache. The series of multiple FMACs is performed using a single


tensor instruction with the activations as a tensor operand. All of these operations are done without


additional overhead on the core. Additionally, there is no memory capacity overhead for the weights


since, once the compute is done, the core moves on to the next weight, never storing any of the


weights. Once all weights for the row have been received, each core contains a partial sum that needs


to be reduced across the row of cores.






That reduction is then triggered by a command packet broadcasted to all the cores of each column.


Again, using the data flow scheduling of the core, once the command packet is received, it triggers the


partial sum reduction. The actual reduction compute is also performed using a single tensor


instruction, this time with fabric tensor operands.






All of the columns receive a partial sum command (PSUM), except one column receives a special final


sum command (FSUM). The FSUM command indicates to the core that it should store the final sum,


ensuring that the output features are stored using the same distribution as was used for the input


features, setting up for the next layer to proceed the same way. Once the core receives the commands,


it communicates using a ring pattern across the entire wafer, which is set up using the static routing


colors of the on-chip fabric. Using microthreads in the core, all of the reduction is overlapped with the


FMAC compute for the next weight row, which starts in parallel. Once all rows of weights are


processed, the full MatMul operation is complete, and all of our activations are in place for the next


layer.






This mapping of the MatMul onto the wafer enables neural networks of practically all sizes to run with


high performance on the single chip. The unique core memory and fabric architecture enable


extremely large matrices to be supported without blocking or model parallel partitioning. Even the


largest models with up to 100,000 × 100,000 MatMul layers can run without splitting up the matrix.


Across all cores of the WSE-3 chip, the CS-3 delivers 2× the performance of CS-2 for large language


models, with significantly increased peak performance through the enhanced 8-wide FP16 SIMD units


in each core. Now, bringing this back to the grand ML demand challenge, leveraging wafer-scale co-


design in this way is how we achieve an order-of-magnitude-level improvement in scaling up.
                                 The Cerebras Wafer-Scale Architecture for Deep Learning


                                                                                                   Page 13




Conclusion


In the past couple of years, we have seen demand of more than three orders of magnitude greater from


ML workloads. There is no sign of slowing down, so the next couple of years could see the ML demand


increasing by another several orders of magnitude. The Cerebras architecture is designed from the


ground up to address this challenge.






The architecture principle is to break from traditional techniques and improve by an order of


magnitude in three key areas:



   by improving the core architecture by an order of magnitude with unstructured sparsity


   acceleration,



   by scaling up by an order of magnitude with wafer-scale chips,



   by improving cluster scale-out by an order of magnitude with truly scalable clustering.






With all of these techniques together, we believe this future is achievable.






Neural network models are continuing to grow exponentially. Few companies today have access to


them, and that list is only getting smaller. With the Cerebras architecture, by enabling the largest


models to run on a single device, data parallel-only scale-out, and native unstructured sparsity


acceleration, our goal is to make these large models available to everyone.
