Etched
Skip to content
We've raised $700M at a $21B valuation led by Jane StreetLearn more
We've raised $700M at a $21B valuation led by Jane StreetLearn more
Join UsProgress
Frontier Inference ClustersFrontier Inference Clusters
We're building a new category of AI hardware: frontier inference clusters.
We co-design chips, racks, software, and manufacturing methods so frontier models can run with best-in-class throughput, latency, cost, and power efficiency for both prefill and decode workloads.
Earlier this year our A0 silicon came back from TSMC N4P, and today we are busy validating our first rack-scale product with customers to fulfill $1B in demand.
We're a team of 400+ engineers from NVIDIA, Google TPUs, Broadcom, SK Hynix, TSMC, and more. We've raised $800M across four unannounced financings, including a strategic investment from VentureTech Alliance. We're excited to deepen our partnership with the world's leading semiconductor manufacturer.
Designing a New Pareto Frontier
Our inference systems are built to push the entire pareto curve on frontier models, including many-trillion-parameter MoEs, long context, and agentic workloads. This required intense co-design, from new chips, packages, PCBs, cold plates, interconnects, and more. Today, we're sharing two breakthroughs to make this happen:
Low Voltage Inference (LVI) for high throughput workloads
Today, AI chips can't scale FLOPs without thermal throttling. As FLOPs utilization increases, AI chips draw more power and downregulate clock speed. This often results in sustained inference throughput under half of Peak FLOPs.
We've designed a new architecture to run our chip's math blocks at under half the voltage of most AI chips. This enables multiple times the FLOPs density of AI chips today. We can run trillion-parameter sparse MoEs at 80%+ Peak FLOPs without thermal throttling.
Running LVI requires co-designing the entire cluster from the transistor to the token: new splittable math arrays, circuit techniques, novel tiling and scheduling algorithms, power delivery networks, VRM architectures, advanced packaging, cold plate designs, and more.
Cluster Scale Memory (CSM) for low-latency workloads
Today's AI chips using HBM can't achieve SRAM-level decode speeds due to memory subsystem and interconnect bottlenecks. SRAM-only chips have lower FLOPs density and memory capacity, sacrificing throughput.
We created a much lower-latency shared memory pool across our scale-up domain. We use a proprietary ultra-low-latency, high-bandwidth interconnect to enable dramatically faster memory access across chips.
Our HBM/SRAM hybrid design solves both memory capacity and mem2mem latency, enabling high throughput and interactivity simultaneously. CSM improves latency and avoids today's cost, reliability, yield, thermal, and compute tradeoffs of SRAM-only chips, 3D DRAM chips, or optics.
We've made co-design decisions hand-in-hand with leading AI companies, cloud providers, and hyperscalers. We've tested racks in representative data center deployments, run terabytes of production traffic patterns through our simulator, and had dozens of engineers live overseas for months to co-design deeply with our supply-chain partners. If this sounds exciting, you should join us.
Getting to Gigawatt Scale
Early customer tests show us achieving SOTA throughput, latency, and power efficiency on inference workloads. We'll be sharing more updates on our performance and roadmap this summer.
Our first racks ship this summer, and we've kicked off production to fulfill over $1B in customer contracts. To enable 24/7 engineering cycles, we've opened a Taiwan factory and built a data center, test house, and NPI prototyping lab in our San Jose office.
We are vertically integrated to get to Gigawatt scale as quickly as possible. Math block designers sit next to inference engineers, thermal experts next to GSMs.
Get Access
Gavin Uberti
Co-Founder & CEO
Harvard Thiel Fellow. World math champion, Math 55 alumnus, expert in AI compilers, developed the Cortex-M backend for TVM.
Robert Wachen
Co-Founder & President
Harvard Thiel Fellow. Co-founded Prod ($100B+ cohort valuation) and Mentor Labs (acq. by Crimson Education).
Mark Ross
CTO
Ex-CTO of Cypress (acquired for $9.4B). Shipped 5 systems generating >$1B in revenue, all on A0 silicon.
Brian Loiler
VP of Platform
Ex-NVIDIA for 22 years. Led platform engineering teams across NVIDIA. Built the HGX and DGX systems from scratch.
Wayne Cao
VP of Production
Led 0-1 production & supply chain ramps for 24 products including the original iPhone, MacBook Air, Pixel, and Chromebook.
Saptadeep Pal
VP of ASIC & Architecture
Co-founded Auradine. NVIDIA H100/A100/V100 architecture team. Qualcomm award for research on waferscale SRAM & DRAM stacking.
David Munday
VP of Software
Built the TPU software team (TPU v1-v5) and led research for Project Astra at Deepmind.
Tim Perevozchikov
VP of Finance
Ex-VP Quant Trading & Chief of Staff to CEO at Two Sigma Securities. Built multiple new trading desks from scratch.
Ajat Hukkoo
Distinguished Engineer at Broadcom & VP of Intel's Custom Silicon Group. Shipped 300 million chips across nine A0 products.
Chris Zhu
Co-Founder
Harvard Thiel Fellow. Math and high performance computing researcher, Math 55 alumnus. Published novel combinatorics work.
Build the future of inference →Build the future of inference →
We’re grateful for the support of our investors and angels, including:
Tri Dao
FlashAttention
Geoffrey Hinton
Godfather of AI
Peter Thiel
Thiel Capital
Jerry Tworek
OpenAI
Andrej Karpathy
Anthropic
Aidan Gomez
Cohere
Arthur Mensch
Mistral
Noam Brown
OpenAI
Scott Wu
Cognition
Fei-Fei Li
World Labs
Tal Broda
OpenAI
Stanley Druckenmiller
Duquesne
Ben Spector
Flapping Airplanes
Irwan Bello
Reflection AI
Pieter Abbeel
Covariant
Shivon Zilis
Neuralink
Amjad Masad
Replit
Jason Warner
Poolside
Zach Dell
Base Power
Kyle Vogt
The Bot Company
Scott Belsky
A24
Lachy Groom
Physical Intelligence
Nikesh Arora
Palo Alto Networks
Bryan Johnson
Blueprint
Karim Atiyeh
Ramp
Dylan Field
Figma
Stefano Ermon
Inception
Yash Patil
Applied Compute
Jesse Zhang
Decagon
Nikita Bier
X
LegalPrivacyPrivacy NoticeMedia KitJoin Us
Etched is faster
Get Access
Etched is faster
Etched HQ
3155 Olsen Dr
San Jose, CA 95117
Get Access