TPU architecture | Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Documentation
close
Get Started
Get Started with Google Cloud
Product List
Cloud Customer Care
Featured Products
Agent Platform
Apigee API Management
BigQuery
Compute Engine
Cloud CDN
Cloud Run
Cloud Storage
Cloud SQL
Gemini Enterprise
Google Kubernetes Engine
Looker
Cross-product Tools
Access and resources management
Costs and usage management
Infrastructure as code
SDK, languages, frameworks, and tools
Technology Areas
AI and ML
Application development
Application hosting
Compute
Data analytics and pipelines
Databases
Distributed, hybrid, and multicloud
Industry solutions
Migration
Networking
Observability and monitoring
Security
Storage
/
Console
English
Deutsch
Español
Español – América Latina
Français
Indonesia
Italiano
Português
Português – Brasil
עברית
中文 – 简体
中文 – 繁體
日本語
한국어
Sign in
Cloud TPU
Start free
Overview
Guides
Reference
Samples
Support
Resources
Documentation
More
Overview
Guides
Reference
Samples
Support
Resources
Console
Discover
Introduction to Cloud TPU
TPU architecture
TPU versions
TPU7x (Ironwood)
TPU v6e
TPU v5p
TPU v5e
TPU v4
Regions and zones
Cloud TPU resources in Compute Engine
JAX AI stack
Get started
Set up a Google Cloud project
Quickstarts
Create a TPU instance
Create a multi-host TPU slice
Plan your Cloud TPU resources
Reserve TPUs
About TPU reservations
Request a reservation for up to 90 days (in calendar mode)
Request a future reservation for one year or longer
Share a reservation
Consume a reservation
Create TPUs
TPU creation overview
Create a TPU VM instance
Create TPU Flex-start VMs
Create TPU Spot VMs
TPU instances in MIGs
Create a MIG for a multi-host TPU slice
Create a MIG for single-host TPU slices
Configure TPUs
Configure networking and access
TPU OS images
Use a custom OS image
Encrypt a TPU VM boot disk with a CMEK
Use a cross-project service account
Manage storage
Storage options for TPU VMs
Storage best practices
Attach storage disks
Connect to Cloud Storage buckets
Manage TPUs
Manage TPU resources with Compute Engine
Manage maintenance events in managed capacity mode
Manage TPUs in All Capacity mode
All Capacity mode overview
Request an All Capacity mode reservation
View the topology and health of All Capacity mode TPUs
Report and repair faulty hosts in All Capacity mode
Manage maintenance events in All Capacity mode
Multislice training
Schedule TPU collections for inference workloads
Run workloads
Train a model using TPU7x
Run inference on Cloud TPU
Train on Cloud TPU slices
Scale a model on TPUs
Work with image datasets
Convert an image classification dataset for use with Cloud TPU
Download, pre-process and upload the ImageNet dataset
Download, pre-process and upload the COCO dataset
Optimize performance
Cloud TPU performance guide
Improve your model's performance with bfloat16
TPU7x (Ironwood) performance optimizations
Monitor and troubleshoot TPUs
Monitor TPU VMs
Monitor TPU health
Monitor TPU capacity
Monitor TPU goodput
TPU monitoring library
Monitor with tpu-info CLI
Troubleshoot PyTorch models
Troubleshoot JAX models
ML Diagnostics platform
Overview
Set up GKE
Get started with the SDK
Get started with the CLI
Use ML Diagnostics with MaxText
View machine learning runs
Monitor workloads
Profile TPUs
Profile TPU VMs
Profile Multislice environments
Profile PyTorch/XLA workloads
Cloud TPU API
Discover
TPU software versions
TPU versions
TPU v3
TPU v2
Get started
Set up a Google Cloud project
Create TPUs
Consume a reservation
Run JAX on Cloud TPU VM
Run PyTorch on Cloud TPU VM
Run JAX on Cloud TPU slices
Run PyTorch on Cloud TPU slices
Configure TPUs
Connect a TPU to a shared VPC network
Connect to a TPU VM without a public IP address
Configure networking and access
Encrypt a TPU VM boot disk with a CMEK
Use a cross-project service account
Attach durable block storage to a TPU VM
Connect to Cloud Storage buckets
Mount a Filestore instance on a TPU VM
Manage TPUs
Manage TPU resources
Manage queued resources
Request TPU Flex-start VMs
Manage TPU Spot VMs
Prepare for maintenance events
Autocheckpoint
View maintenance notifications
Manually start host maintenance
Preemptible TPUs
Run workloads
Train a model using v6e
Train a model using v5e
Scale ML workloads using Ray
Run TPU applications in a Docker container
Monitor and troubleshoot TPUs
Troubleshoot TPU VMs
Monitor TPU VMs
Dashboards for monitoring and logging
Troubleshoot TensorFlow models
Cloud TPU error glossary
Cloud TPU audit logs
Tutorials and notebooks
Train ResNet with PyTorch
MaxDiffusion inference on v6e
Notebooks
Get Started
Get Started with Google Cloud
Product List
Cloud Customer Care
Featured Products
Agent Platform
Apigee API Management
BigQuery
Compute Engine
Cloud CDN
Cloud Run
Cloud Storage
Cloud SQL
Gemini Enterprise
Google Kubernetes Engine
Looker
Cross-product Tools
Access and resources management
Costs and usage management
Infrastructure as code
SDK, languages, frameworks, and tools
Technology Areas
AI and ML
Application development
Application hosting
Compute
Data analytics and pipelines
Databases
Distributed, hybrid, and multicloud
Industry solutions
Migration
Networking
Observability and monitoring
Security
Storage
Home
Documentation
AI and ML
Cloud TPU
Guides
Send feedback
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
TPU architecture
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) are application specific integrated circuits
(ASICs) designed by Google to accelerate machine learning workloads. You can use
TPUs through Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine, and Vertex AI.
TPUs are designed to perform matrix operations quickly making them ideal for
machine learning workloads. You can run machine learning workloads on TPUs using
frameworks such as PyTorch and
JAX.
How do TPUs work?
To understand how TPUs work, it helps to understand how other accelerators
address the computational challenges of training ML models.
How a CPU works
A CPU is a general-purpose processor based on the von Neumann
architecture. That
means a CPU works with software and memory like this:
Note: This animation is designed for conceptual presentation purpose only, and
does not reflect the actual behavior of real processors.
The greatest benefit of CPUs is their flexibility. You can load any kind of
software on a CPU for many different types of applications. For example, you can
use a CPU for word processing on a PC, controlling rocket engines, executing
bank transactions, or classifying images with a neural network.
A CPU loads values from memory, performs a calculation on the values and stores
the result back in memory for every calculation. Memory access is slow when
compared to the calculation speed and can limit the total throughput of CPUs.
This is often referred to as the Von Neumann
bottleneck.
How a GPU works
To gain higher throughput, GPUs contain thousands of Arithmetic Logic
Units (ALUs) in a single
processor. A modern GPU usually contains between 2,500–5,000 ALUs. The large
number of processors means you can execute thousands of multiplications and
additions simultaneously.
Note: This animation is designed for conceptual presentation purpose only, and
does not reflect the actual behavior of real processors.
This GPU architecture works well on applications with massive parallelism, such
as matrix operations in a neural network. In fact, on a typical training
workload for deep learning, a GPU can provide an order of magnitude higher
throughput than a CPU.
But, the GPU is still a general-purpose processor that has to support many
different applications and software. Therefore, GPUs have the same problem as
CPUs. For every calculation in the thousands of ALUs, a GPU must access
registers or shared memory to read operands and store the intermediate
calculation results.
How a TPU works
Google designed Cloud TPUs as a matrix processor specialized for neural
network workloads. TPUs can't run word processors, control rocket engines, or
execute bank transactions, but they can handle massive matrix operations used in
neural networks at fast speeds.
The primary task for TPUs is matrix processing, which is a combination of
multiply and accumulate operations. TPUs contain thousands of
multiply-accumulators that are directly connected to each other to form a large
physical matrix. This is called a systolic
array architecture. Cloud TPU
v3, contain two systolic arrays of 128 x 128 ALUs, on a single processor.
The TPU host streams data into an infeed queue. The TPU loads data from the
infeed queue and stores them in High Bandwidth Memory (HBM). When the
computation is completed, the TPU loads the results into the outfeed queue. The
TPU host then reads the results from the outfeed queue and stores them in the
host's memory.
To perform the matrix operations, the TPU loads the parameters from HBM into the
Matrix Multiplication Unit (MXU).
Then, the TPU loads data from HBM. As each multiplication is executed, the
result is passed to the next multiply-accumulator. The output is the summation
of all multiplication results between the data and parameters. No memory access
is required during the matrix multiplication process.
As a result, TPUs can achieve a high-computational throughput on neural network
calculations.
TPU system architecture
The following sections describe the key concepts of a TPU system. For more
information about common machine learning terms, see Machine Learning
Glossary.
If you are new to Cloud TPU, check out the TPU documentation home
page.
TPU chip
A TPU chip contains one or more TensorCores. The number of TensorCores depends
on the version of the TPU chip. Each TensorCore consists of one or more
matrix-multiply units (MXUs), a vector unit, and a scalar unit. For more
information about TensorCores, see A Domain-Specific Supercomputer for Training
Deep Neural Networks.
An MXU is composed of either 256 x 256 (TPU v6e and TPU7x) or 128 x 128 (TPU versions
prior to v6e) multiply-accumulators in a systolic
array. MXUs provide the bulk of
the compute power in a TensorCore. Each MXU is capable of performing 16K
multiply-accumulate operations per cycle. All multiplies take
bfloat16 inputs,
but all accumulations are performed in FP32 number format.
The vector unit is used for general computation such as activations and softmax.
The scalar unit is used for control flow, calculating memory addresses, and
other maintenance operations.
TPU Pod
A TPU Pod is a contiguous set of TPUs grouped together over a specialized
network. The number of TPU chips in a TPU Pod is dependent on the TPU version.
Slice
A slice is a collection of chips all located inside the same TPU Pod
connected by high-speed inter-chip interconnects (ICI). Slices are described
in terms of chips or TensorCores, depending on the TPU version.
Topology
The topology defines the physical arrangement of TPUs within a TPU slice. TPU
slices have two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) topologies, depending
on the TPU version. You specify a topology as the number of TPU chips in each
dimension as follows:
3D topologies: You define the topology as a 3-tuple ({A}x{B}x{C}), for
example, 4x4x4. The product of {A}x{B}x{C} defines the number of TPU
chips in the slice. If you use a topology with more than 64 chips, the
values you assign to {A}, {B}, and {C} must meet the following
conditions:
{A}, {B}, and {C} must be multiples of four.
The assigned values must follow this pattern: {A} ≤ {B} ≤
{C}. For example, 4x4x8 or 8x8x8.
2D topologies: You define the topology as a 2-tuple ({A}x{B}), for
example, 2x4. The product of {A}x{B} defines the number of TPU chips in
the slice.
A single-host topology refers to a topology with TPU chips from a single
compute host. For example, for TPU7x, each host is connected to four chips. A
2x2x1 slice has four chips
connected to a single host, so 2x2x1 is a single-host topology.
A multi-host topology refers to a topology with TPU chips from more than one
compute host. For example, for TPU7x, 2x2x2 (eight chips from two hosts) and
larger slices are multi-host topologies.
Multislice versus single slice
Multislice is a group of slices, extending TPU connectivity beyond the
inter-chip interconnect (ICI) connections and leveraging the data-center network
(DCN) for transmitting data beyond a slice. Data within each slice is still
transmitted by ICI. Using this hybrid connectivity, Multislice enables
parallelism across slices and lets you use a greater number of TPU cores for a
single job than what a single slice can accommodate.
TPUs can be used to run a job either on a single slice or multiple slices. Refer
to the Multislice introduction for
more details.
TPU cube
A 4x4x4 topology of interconnected TPU chips. This is only applicable to 3D
topologies (beginning with TPU v4).
SparseCore
SparseCores are dataflow processors that accelerate models using sparse
operations. A primary use case is accelerating recommendation models, which rely
heavily on embeddings. v5p and TPU7x have four SparseCores per chip, and v6e has
two SparseCores per chip. For an in-depth explanation on how SparseCores can be
used, see A deep dive into SparseCore for Large
Embedding Models (LEM). You control how the
XLA compiler uses SparseCores using XLA flags. For more information, see:
TPU XLA flags.
Cloud TPU ICI resiliency
ICI resiliency helps improve fault tolerance of optical links and optical
circuit switches (OCS) that connect TPUs between cubes. (ICI
connections within a cube use copper links that are not impacted). ICI
resiliency allows ICI connections to be routed around OCS and optical ICI
faults. As a result, it improves the scheduling availability of TPU slices, with
the trade-off of temporary degradation in ICI performance.
For Cloud TPU v4, v5p, and TPU7x, ICI
resiliency is enabled by default for slices that are one cube or larger, for
example:
v5p-128 when specifying accelerator type
4x4x4 when specifying accelerator config
TPU versions
The exact architecture of a TPU chip depends on the TPU version that you use.
Each TPU version also supports different slice sizes and configurations. For
more information about the system architecture and supported configurations, see
the following pages:
TPU7x (Ironwood)
TPU v6e
TPU v5p
TPU v5e
TPU v4
TPU v3
TPU v2
Note: You can run the same code on different versions of TPUs as long as the
TPUs have the same number of TensorCores or chips (for example, v3-128 and
v4-128). However, if you change to a TPU type with a larger or smaller number
of TensorCores or chips, you will need to perform significant tuning and
optimization. For more information, see Training on TPU
Pods.
TPU cloud architecture
Google Cloud makes TPUs available as compute resources through TPU VMs. You can
use TPUs for your workloads through Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine,
Vertex AI. The following sections describe key components of the TPU
cloud architecture.
TPU VM architecture
The TPU VM architecture lets you directly connect to the VM physically connected
to the TPU device using SSH. A TPU VM, also known as a worker, is a virtual
machine running Linux that has access to the underlying TPUs. You have root
access to the VM, so you can run arbitrary code. You can access compiler and
runtime debug logs and error messages.
Single host, multi host, and sub host
A TPU host is a VM that runs on a physical computer connected to TPU hardware.
TPU workloads can use one or more host.
A single-host workload is limited to one TPU VM. A multi-host workload
distributes training across multiple TPU VMs. A sub-host workload doesn't use
all of the chips on a TPU VM.
TPU topology visualizer
The TPU topology visualizer
is a tool that lets you visualize the physical layout of TPUs and their
associated networking infrastructure within a physical data center. Use the tool
to understand the physical infrastructure layout for different TPU
generations and topologies.
What's next
Getting started guides
Tutorials
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License, and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2026-08-26 UTC.
Need to tell us more?
[[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Hard to understand","hardToUnderstand","thumb-down"],["Incorrect information or sample code","incorrectInformationOrSampleCode","thumb-down"],["Missing the information/samples I need","missingTheInformationSamplesINeed","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-08-26 UTC."],[],[]]
Products and pricing
See all products
Google Cloud pricing
Google Cloud Marketplace
Contact sales
Support
Community forums
Support
Release Notes
System status
Resources
GitHub
Getting Started with Google Cloud
Code samples
Cloud Architecture Center
Training and Certification
Engage
Blog
Events
X (Twitter)
Google Cloud on YouTube
Google Cloud Tech on YouTube
Android
Chrome
Firebase
Google AI
About Google
Privacy
Site terms
Google Cloud terms
Manage cookies
Our third decade of climate action: join us
Sign up for the Google Cloud newsletter
Subscribe
English
Deutsch
Español
Español – América Latina
Français
Indonesia
Italiano
Português
Português – Brasil
עברית
中文 – 简体
中文 – 繁體
日本語
한국어