Google's Training Supercomputers from TPU v2 to Ironwood:
Architectural Stability, Scale, Resilience, Power Efficiency,
         and Sustainability Across Five Generations
            Norman P. Jouppi, Sridhar Lakshmanamurthy, Cliff Young, and David Patterson, Google, LLC

Abstract
This paper (to appear in the July/August 2026 issue of IEEE Micro magazine) summarizes five generations of
Google's TPUs, from TPU v2 to Ironwood, highlighting their evolution as scalable, resilient, power-efficient,
sustainable supercomputers for AI training. It details the TPU’s stable architecture, which has surprisingly
easily accommodated the rapidly changing deep neural network workloads, such as the rise of Transformers.
Key advancements over eight years include 10x increase in HBM capacity and bandwidth per node, a 100x
increase in peak node performance, and a 3600x increase in supercomputer performance. The paper also
discusses the role of optical circuit switches, built-in self test, and hardware replay in enhancing resilience and
how TPU's environmental impact is reduced with substantial improvements in performance per Watt and in
carbon emissions per floating point operation. It concludes by identifying six features that may well
characterize successful training accelerators of this decade.

Introduction
A decade ago, few expected a software company like Google to build its own chips. The announcement in May
2016 of the first Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) startled many. It offered 30x the performance per Watt of
contemporary GPUs and 80x over contemporary CPUs for deep neural network (DNN) inference [Jouppi17,
Jouppi18]. TPU v1 inspired others to act:
    ●​ Within 4 months Intel spent billions of dollars acquiring two DNN hardware startups (Nervana and
        Movidius) and then two more over the next few years (MobilEye and Habana).
    ●​ Over 18 months the venture community invested $1.5B in 45 startups [Metz18], growing to ~$3B
        annually in over 100 DNN hardware startups.
    ●​ Hyperscalers Alibaba and Amazon (and eventually Microsoft) started their own DNN inference chips.
Its widespread influence motivated one pundit to observe that TPU v1 "launched a thousand chips"
[Babbge24], a tongue-in-cheek reference to the famous line about Helen of Troy.1

TPU v2, Google’s first training supercomputer, was already well underway in May 2016. Twelve months later it
was deployed and revealed publicly. Since then, Google has continuously deployed new chips for DNN training
and serving, powering key services.

This paper reviews five generations of TPU training supercomputers2, also called pods. Skeptics initially
warned that an ASIC might be too tailored to existing DNN models, quickly becoming outdated given AI’s rapid
pace. That proved not to be the case. The founding principles of TPU v2 demonstrated remarkable longevity,
with later generations increasing component speed and size by riding technological breakthroughs without
altering the underlying design. Not all accelerators can make this claim.

In addition to documenting TPU’s staying power, this paper illustrates how it scaled successfully. TPUs have
hurdled the Accelerator Wall [Fuchs19] that claims Moore's Law accounts for the majority of benefit after the
first couple of generations. In an era of diminished Moore's Law and no Dennard scaling, TPU supercomputers
grew a staggering 3600x in system-level performance. The paper also explains how their resilience improved
to work effectively at 36x more nodes, how their carbon footprint per floating point operation shrank, and
pinpoints features that may explain TPU’s durable success.

1
    “Was this the face that launch'd a thousand ships,” from Doctor Faustus, by Christopher Marlowe, 1594.
2
    Trillium (TPU v6) is focussed on inference.
                                                                                                                  1
Improved Scale Over Time
Table 1 shows how the TPU node and supercomputer scaled over 8 years:
   ●​ HBM (High Bandwidth Memory) capacity and bandwidth per TPU increased ~10X;
   ●​ Performance per Watt rose ~30X;
   ●​ Supercomputer size and interconnect bisection bandwidth both grew ~40X;
   ●​ Directly-addressable shared (supercomputer-level) HBM memory expanded ~400x, from 4 terabytes in
       TPU v2 to 1.77 petabytes in Ironwood, a new record for AI supercomputers;
   ●​ Peak performance per TPU advanced a remarkable ~100X, from 46 BF16 TFLOPS in TPU v2 to 4614
       FP8 TFLOPS in Ironwood (or ~50X for BF16 at 2307 TFLOPS);
   ●​ Peak supercomputer performance jumped ~3600X, an impressive compound annual growth rate of
       nearly 100% despite losing Dennard scaling and Moore’s Law.

                                  TPU v2         TPU v3          TPU v4         TPU v5p         Ironwood
                          Year     2017           2018            2021           2023             2025
      Peak TPU BF16 TFLOPS          46             123            275             459             2307
       Peak TPU BF8 TFLOPS          N.A.           N.A.           N.A.            459             4614
 Matrix Multiply Units (MXU) per                                                             4 256x256 bf16,
                                 2 128x128 bf16 4 128x128 bf16 8 128x128 bf16 8 128x128 bf16
            TPU (Number, Size)                                                                4 512x512 fp8
         VMEM per TPU (MiB)         32              32             32             128             128
                  HBM version      HBM2           HBM2           HBM2           HBM2E            HBM3E
  Number HBM stacks per TPU          2              4               4              6                8
   HBM capacity per TPU (GiB)       16              32             32              96             192
            HBM BW (GB/sec)         700            900            1200           2765             7300
         TensorCores per TPU         2              2               2              2                2
         SparseCores per TPU         2              2               4              4                4
                       Cooling      Air           Liquid         Liquid          Liquid          Liquid
           TPUs per CPU host         4              8               4              4                4
    Pod size (Number of TPUs)       256           1024            4096           8960             9216
                 Pod Topology     2D Torus       2D Torus       3D Torus        3D Torus        3D Torus
             ICI links per Node      4              4               6              6                6
      ICI BW per Link (GB/sec)      62              70             50             100             100
    Pod Bisection BW (GB/sec)      1984           4480           25,600          64,000          76,800
    Pod peak BF16 ExaFLOPS          0.01           0.13            1.1            4.1             21.3
     Pod peak BF8 ExaFLOPS          N.A.           N.A.           N.A.            4.1             42.5

 Pod HBM Capacity (PetaBytes)        4              33            131             851             1769

         Relative Pod TFLOPS
                                     1              10            100             350             3600
      (Normalized FP8 FLOPS)
 Relative Pod TFLOPS/W (TDP)         1             1.8             4.9            5.2             29.3
             Relative Pod TDP        1             5.6             20              67             123
    Table 1. TPU node and supercomputer (“pod”) features over five generations of training TPUs.


                                                                                                               2
Architecture Stability Over Time
Figure 1 shows that DNNs have changed drastically and quickly. Today, variations of Transformer dominate
Google workloads. Despite the potential downside of domain specific architectures becoming mismatched to
latest DNN trends over the 2–3 years it takes to design, fabricate, and deploy an accelerator, the original TPU
v2 microarchitecture demonstrated long-term viability in this fast moving field. Architectural stability reduces the
difficulty of optimizing software and models for new TPUs.




Figure 1. DNN workload mix over five generations of TPUs [Jouppi23]. The rightmost points are Google’s
internal workload for training TPUs in 2026. (TPU v1 and TPU v4 lite are TPUs for inference.) In 2016 DNNs
were dominated by MLPs at 61%, while in 2019-2020 DNN types were relatively equally balanced. Since 2016,
RNNs have practically disappeared (<0.5%), and Diffusion models are now larger than CNNs. The Transformer
paper wasn’t published till December 2017, yet just 15 months later it was already 21% of Google’s production
workload. In 2026 DNN workloads are imbalanced again, with the dominant DNN being Transformer at 74%.

Figure 2 shows a TPU v2 block diagram [Norrie21] that remarkably still holds for every training TPU through
Ironwood. We first review TPU v2 before describing its evolution. (The next few paragraphs are derived from
[Norrie21].)

TPU v2 has two TensorCores. Two cores struck the right balance between longer wire latencies of a single
large core versus exposing numerous tiny cores that software must lash together. Operating on large blocks of
data via two big cores is a much simpler programming model.

                                                                                                                  3
TensorCore’s scalar unit fetches complete VLIW (Very Long Instruction Word) bundles of 322 bits from a
local instruction memory, executes the scalar operation slots locally and then forwards decoded instructions to
the vector and matrix units for later execution, decoupled from scalar execution. After scalar execution, the
instruction bundle and scalar register values are forwarded to the vector unit, which features 128 vector lanes.
Each lane includes an additional 8-way data parallel dimension, known as a sublane, enabling operations on 8
sets of 128-wide vectors per clock cycle. Each lane’s register files perform loads and stores against its local
slice of vector memory (VMEM). An asynchronous DMA (Direct Memory Access) unit transfers data between
HBM and local vector memory. The memory hierarchy is compiler-controlled, unlike some other accelerators
that rely on caches. Since HBM holds vectors and matrices, DMAs can stride through memory. Upon DMA
completion, a notification lands in the core’s sync flags, allowing the program to stall until data arrives.




Figure 2: Block diagram of the two TensorCores in TPU v2 [Norrie21]. The TPU v2 core datapath is blue,
HBM is green, host connectivity is purple, and the interconnect router and links are yellow. Later TPUs have
more interconnect links and matrix multiply units. The SparseCore was present in TPU v2 but was not
disclosed until the TPU v4 paper [Jouppi23]; if it were in this diagram, it would have had links similar to the two
TensorCores.

The matrix multiply unit (MXU) is the computational heart of TPUs. In TPU v2 it was a 128x128 systolic array
of multipliers and adders, delivering 32,768 operations per cycle. TPU v2 was the first DNN accelerator to
diverge from the IEEE floating point standard, as Google determined that for DNNs range was more important
than precision. In 16-bit Brain Float format (BF16), for the first time the exponent (8 bits) is larger than its
fraction (7 bits). In contrast, IEEE’s exponent is smaller, e.g., FP16 uses 5-bit exponents and 10-bit fractions
and FP32 uses 8-bit exponents and 23-bit fractions. Many subsequent narrower floating formats have followed
BF16's precedent of bigger exponents. Multiplications are in BF16 with accumulation in full IEEE FP32.
Beyond matrix multiplication, other units efficiently perform various matrix primitives, such as transposes, row
reductions, or column permutations.

TPU v2 featured four off-chip links (Inter-Chip Interconnect or ICI) and two on-chip links to an on-chip
router. These four links enable the 2D torus system interconnect for 256 TPUs, supporting common ML
communication patterns, like AllReduce. DMAs to other TPUs function similarly to DMAs to local HBM, though
with a “push-only” restriction for simplicity.3 This dedicated TPU interconnect enabled scalable synchronous
training across all TPUs.
3
    Push-only means it supports writes but not reads. TPUs rely on software to ensure safety and synchronization.
                                                                                                                    4
The SparseCore is a domain-specific architecture initially for embedding training [Jouppi23]. SparseCores are
relatively inexpensive, typically occupying only ~5% of the die area and ~5% of the power. They operate in a
sea-of-cores configuration, integrating supercomputer-scale HBM and ICI to create a flat, globally addressable
memory space. Unlike AllReduces of large parameter tensors in dense training, the all-to-all transfers of
smaller embedding vectors utilize HBM and ICI with finer-grained access patterns for scatter/gather. As
separate cores, SparseCores enable parallelization across dense compute, SparseCore, and ICI
communications. We consider SparseCore as a “dataflow” architecture because data flows from memory to
various specialized compute units.

SparseCore units contain 16 compute tiles. Each tile features an associated HBM channel and supports
multiple outstanding memory accesses. Each tile also includes a Fetch Unit, a programmable 8-wide SIMD
Vector Processing Unit, and a Flush Unit. The Fetch Unit reads activations and parameters from the HBM into
the tile’s slice of a 2.5 MiB Sparse Vector Memory. During the backward pass, the Flush Unit writes updated
parameters to HBM. Similar to TPU v1, the units execute CISC-like instructions and operate on variable-length
inputs, where instruction execution time is data-dependent.

SparseCore was initially developed for sparse embedding tables within deep learning recommendation
models, used in advertising, search ranking, YouTube, and Google Play applications. These models constituted
61% of the TPU v1 workload in 2016 and still represented ~25% for TPU v4 in 2022 [Jouppi23]. With the rise of
Transformer models, which accounted for 60% of the workload by 2022, SparseCores also began serving as
offload engines for collective operations like AllReduce, AllGather, ReduceScatter, and Broadcast; data
summarization operations like Top-K; and small sparse tensor operations like Transformer Decode.
Furthermore, SparseCores enhance performance by operating in parallel while the TensorCores handle dense
attention on the feed forward path of Transformers.

We connect the TPU supercomputer to storage over the data center network to provide input data for the
model via a PCIe-connected CPU host. Maintaining system balance across CPU, network, and storage is
critical for achieving end-to-end performance at scale.


TPU Software Stack
The TPU software stack has evolved over TPUs from v2 to Ironwood, with the XLA (Accelerated Linear
Algebra) framework as the one constant. Early TPUs were driven by TensorFlow, with a “bridge” that translated
from TensorFlow graphs into XLA’s High Level Optimizer (HLO) format. Inside of XLA, “fusions” (akin to region
formation in instruction level parallelism compilers) allow optimization across many operations to save passes
through memory. Today JAX (Just-in-time Auto-differentiated XLA) has become the language and system of
choice for programming TPUs, with the Pallas kernel language adding fine-grained control for model
developers.


Architecture Evolution Over Time
Figure 3 shows five generations of TPU boards and packages for the three most recent. It illustrates the
remarkable stability of always having four TPUs per board despite tremendous changes. The first three images
capture the jump from air to liquid cooling and the switch from a liquid cooling loop to distribution and collection
manifolds. Less visible are the advances in power delivery and regulation (including vertical power delivery) or
the increase in die size, chiplet count, and packaging sophistication.

The evolutions of TPU microarchitecture across generations is primarily in scale and number of components
rather than in introducing new microarchitecture features, as in other accelerators:


                                                                                                                   5
   ●​ TensorCores: Every training TPU uses two physical TensorCores that share only HBM. Since TPU v4,
      our XLA (Accelerated Linear Algebra) compiler has supported tensor parallelization directives that give
      the illusion of a single large core—called Megacore—unifying HBM capacity and ICI bandwidth in a
      single effective thread [JAX24].
   ●​ Matrix multiply unit (MXU): Systolic arrays proved to be a foundational building block that most
      accelerators either adopted from the start or eventually integrated if they didn’t. Leveraging improved
      logic density from 16 nm to finer geometries, MXUs scaled from two 128x128 systolic arrays in TPU v2
      to four 256x256 arrays for bf16 in Ironwood. Ironwood also added support for FP8 arithmetic, which
      means it can also compute four 512x512 FP8 multiplies. Similar to adding redundant rows to improve
      memory yield and cost, Ironwood added a redundant row in the MXU.




Figure 3. Five generations of training TPU trays and closeup photos of the three latest generations of
packages. The HBM stacks are visible on the left and right of the compute die(s) in the TPU packages: 4 for
TPU v4, 6 for TPU v5p, and 8 for Ironwood. Ironwood uses two compute dies per package.

   ●​ VPU: Improved logic density enabled the VPU to evolve from two restricted ALUs per vector lane
      —each capable of some, but not all, ALU operations—to four general-purpose ALUs per lane. Vector
      registers also doubled in both dimensions, from 8x128 in TPU v2–v5p to 16x256 in Ironwood. The
      vector architecture is well-suited for non-matrix DNN operations, such as activation functions, softmax,
      and batch normalization, and quantization functions for lower precision numerics.

                                                                                                                 6
    ●​ VLIW instructions: Specifying instruction level parallelism via VLIW works well. We simply widen the
       VLIW instruction each generation as TPUs gain more parallel hardware to control, such as more MXUs;
       Ironwood instructions are >50% wider than TPU v2. DNN programs are not prohibitively large, making
       extra instruction memory inexpensive, and backwards binary compatibility—required for CPUs—is
       superfluous.
    ●​ SparseCores: Their architecture became more general purpose and performance increased per
       generation—for example, by 2.4x from TPU v5p to Ironwood—plus their number doubled from two in
       TPU v2 to four in TPU v4, same as Ironwood.
    ●​ VMEM: SRAM density grew more slowly than logic density. Consequently, size only quadrupled from 32
       MB per node in TPU v2 to 128 MB in TPU v5p and Ironwood despite a considerably larger die area.
    ●​ HBM: Similar to systolic arrays for MXUs, HBM proved a judicious choice for main memory. Standard
       DRAM was a bottleneck in TPU v1 [Jouppi17], so TPU v2 upped memory bandwidth by 30x with HBM.
       Over eight years, TPUs scaled capacity and bandwidth another tenfold from 16 GiB at 700 GB/sec
       using 4 stacks of HBM2 in TPU v2 to 192 GiB at 7300 GB/sec using 8 stacks of HBM3E in Ironwood.
       Once again, most accelerators either used HBM initially or eventually adopted it.
    ●​ ICI: Grew from 4 external links at 62 GB/sec4 per node, forming a 2D Torus interconnect in TPU v2, to 6
       external links at 100 GB/sec per node, allowing a 3D Torus in TPU v4, TPU v5p, and Ironwood.
       Ironwood increased the number of nodes 36X and bisection bandwidth 39X over TPU v2.
    ●​ Supercomputer size: Grew from 256 nodes in TPU v2 to 9216 nodes in Ironwood (0.25K to 9K).


Improved Resilience Over Time
Google has long built dependable computing services using distributed systems of commodity components.
Our approach to dependable training supercomputers follows those found in high performance computing, as
both involve running large, long-duration batch jobs rather than interactive services. The key features are:
     1.​ Enhanced node quality: to reduce the chances of failure during execution.
     2.​ Error checking: to discover errors during execution.
     3.​ Checkpoint/restore: to recover continued execution of long running batch jobs after a failure occurs.
     4.​ Strict deterministic repeatability requirements: to aid in system testing and failure detection.
     5.​ Modular isolation: To allow the supercomputer to stay in service even if some nodes have failed.
Google employed synchronous data-parallel training to parallelise over multiple 8960-chip TPU v5p pods in
multiple data centers for Gemini 2.5 with a goodput of 93% [Gemini25]. A similar measure at a smaller scale
for Gemini 1.0 on TPU v4 was 97% [Gemini23]. Goodput is short for “good throughput”, which in training
systems is the rate of good or effective training progress. For example, we might report a training throughput of
X for a system in normal operation, but if the system spends 10% of its total time recovering from errors or
failures, then the goodput would be 0.9X.
Point 5 significantly improved starting with TPU v4, the first supercomputer to use optical circuit switches
(OCSes) [Jouppi 23]. (The next few paragraphs are derived from that paper.) To enhance data center
networking, Google advanced the state-of-the-art in reliability and cost of optical transceivers based on 3D
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) mirrors that switch in milliseconds. Within a rack, electrical
connections offered the best cost-performance. The question then is what size electrically-cabled building
block should be used? Given the 3D torus, 3D cubes have the best bisection bandwidth, suggesting 4×4×4 (64
chips) or 8×8×8 (512). With 4 TPU per CPU host, 64 TPU chips and their 16 CPU hosts comfortably fit into one
rack. Since 512 chips need multiple racks, a 4x4x4 (43) building block was chosen; we call them cubes.




4
 Bandwidth per direction. Some accelerators would report double the bandwidth, arguing that the link can simultaneously
send and receive. We follow network conventions, i.e., Ethernets that simultaneously send and receive at 100
Gbits/second are labeled 100 G-bit, not 200 G-bit.
                                                                                                                      7
Figure 4 illustrates the links from the 6 “faces” of a 43 cube. There are 16 links per face, totaling 96 optical links
per cube that connect to OCSes. To create the wraparound links of a 3D torus, links on opposing sides must
connect to the same OCS. Therefore, each cube connects to 6 × 16 ÷ 2 = 48 OCSes. The TPU v4 OCS
featured 136×136 (128 ports plus 8 spares for link testing and repairs), so 48 OCSes connect to 48 pairs of
cables from 64 cubes (each 64 chips), resulting in the desired total of 4096 TPU v4 chips. Similar to HPC
supercomputers, the workload comprises various scale sizes, termed "slices,"i.e., 64, 128, …, 2048 chips.




                          Figure 4. TPU Cubes and optical interconnect [Jouppi23].

ICI, the TPU supercomputer interconnect, relies on a 3D Torus topology with a distributed router as part of
every TPU chip; it needs no extra chips for TPU-to-TPU communication. OCSes provide essentially a physical
layer below ICI that enhances availability by routing around failures. The primary availability challenge for TPU
supercomputers lies with the CPU host; each host has 4 TPUs, meaning an Ironwood supercomputer has
2304 CPU hosts. Without OCSes, host availability must be >99.9% to achieve high slice goodput.

The OCS also streamlines scheduling, thereby increasing utilization. For TPU v2 and TPU v3, scheduling a
128 chip slice required the scheduler to locate 128 contiguous idle chips. With OCS, the scheduler can select
two 43 cubes from anywhere in the supercomputer. The difficulty of scheduling increases sharply with slice
size. This improved availability and simplified scheduling are why Ironwood has 9K nodes rather than a power
of 2. Ironwood can run four of the popular 2K slice jobs (each requiring 32 cubes) even if some nodes are
down, as 16 spare cubes remain available as substitutes.

OCSes also shrink deployment time [Jouppi23]. TPU v3 systems were not usable until all 1024 chips and all
cables were installed and tested. Delivery delays for any component held up the entire supercomputer. Starting
with TPU v4, OCSes made each rack independent, so each cube was put into production as soon as 64 chips
and the necessary cables were installed and tested. Incremental deployment greatly improves the time to
production use and thus cost effectiveness of TPU supercomputers.

Silent Data Corruption (SDC) in compute logic presents a critical challenge to large-scale AI reliability
[George26]. Marginal defects, stemming from manufacturing escapes or silicon aging, can silently degrade
model quality and convergence. While previous TPU generations relied on software-based health checks and
in-situ workload monitors [Gemini25], Ironwood extends these mitigations into hardware:


                                                                                                                    8
   1.​ The Functional Built-In Self-Test (FBIST) engine, integrated within the MXU, executes high-coverage
       functional test patterns during manufacturing and data center burn-in to intercept chips that pass
       structural tests before they reach the fleet and during operation to find newly flawed chips.
   2.​ To combat intermittent errors in the compute datapath caused by environmental stressors—such as
       voltage fluctuations, temperature shifts, or specific data patterns—Ironwood introduces a hardware
       replay unit for the VPU. This compiler-transparent unit randomly samples vector bundles for
       opportunistic redundant execution within existing idle slots in VLIW instructions. By replaying odd-lane
       operations on the even lanes without altering architectural state, the mechanism provides effective error
       detection with zero performance overhead and negligible power impact. Deployed across the
       production fleet, this in-situ monitoring has consistently identified defective units that evaded all other
       screening methods. Once identified, these units are immediately removed from production using the
       OCSes and later repaired.

Improved Power Efficiency Over Time
Vahdat et al. [Vahdat24] recommended that accelerator designers consider average power per workload
goodput rather than just benchmark performance per total cost of ownership (TCO). This shift is driven by the
increasing difficulty of securing sufficient electrical power for new data centers, encouraging maximum
utilization of available power. Today, performance per Watt is more highly regarded than performance per TCO.
Figure 5 illustrates a consistent improvement in performance per Watt across TPU generations, although it
uses peak performance per TDP (Thermal Dissipation Power) Watt rather than measured performance and
power running production workloads as Vahdat et al. recommend. The significance of operational emissions in
the overall carbon footprint of TPUs, as we see next, highlights the importance of these gains.




Figure 5. Relative improvement in peak performance per TDP Watt of TPU supercomputers for training
over five generations. (Bigger is better.)


                                                                                                                9
Improved Sustainability Over Time
Vahdat et al. also recommended that attention be paid to carbon emissions per workload goodput [Vahdat 24].
Toward that end, Google recently completed a life-cycle assessment (LCA) of several TPUs [Schneider25].
LCA is a comprehensive analysis of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with TPU hardware that
includes the entire lifespan of the hardware, from the extraction of raw materials to manufacturing and energy
use. (This section is derived from that paper.)

A key challenge was balancing the increased manufacturing costs and power consumption of newer TPUs with
their growing performance. Newer TPUs might consume more power per second, but training also takes fewer
seconds. The answer was a new metric: compute carbon intensity (CCI). It quantifies the carbon dioxide
equivalent emissions5 (CO2e) per utilized floating point operation, or CO2e/FLOP6. CCI’s significant advantage
is that iit’s easy to incorporate both embodied carbon emissions and operational carbon emissions, as total ​
CCI = operational CCI + embodied CCI. Unlike CCI, performance per Watt excludes embodied emissions.

Figure 6 shows the CCI for three training TPUs [Schneider25][Huang26]. TPU v5p is 1.1x better for operational
and overall CCI than TPU v4, and 1.3x for embodied CCI. Ironwood has a much bigger operational jump of
~3.7x, as Figure 5 suggests, and ~3.8x for embodied.




Figure 6. Compute carbon intensity5 (gCO2e/1018 FLOPs) for three training TPUs.7 (Smaller is better.)
Embodied emissions are amortized over six year lifetimes for all TPUs. While the absolute embodied CO2e is
higher for Ironwood vs TPU v5p and higher for TPU v5p vs TPU v4, the carbon emissions per floating point
operation (CCI) is lower because the newer TPUs are so much faster than their predecessors.

5
  Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) measures the climate impact of GHGes like methane and nitrous oxide by converting
them to the amount of CO2 that would cause the same amount of warming over, say, 100 years, using their global
warming potential. Combining GHGes into one number simplifies carbon assessment.
6
  ExaFLOP (1018 FLOPs) was picked so that CO2e is in grams versus a smaller unit. It is a fixed amount of computation,
not a rate: it’s ExaFLOP, not ExaFLOPs/second (aka ExaFLOPS).
7
  The GHG protocol offers two variations of operational emissions. Figure 6 shows market-based emissions, which credits
carbon-free energy purchases. Location-based, which excludes them, would raise operational CCI to 793, 712, and 195
gCO2e/EFLOP, respectively. CCI ratios between TPUs don’t change, but Ironwood’s embodied CCI would drop from
~23% to ~8% of total emissions.
                                                                                                                    10
Operational CCI is ~75% of overall CCI for all three TPUs, reflecting both the relatively high power use and
long lifetimes of data center AI accelerators. Unsurprisingly, given the low power and short lifetimes of mobile
devices, the roles reverse: 87% of smartphone emissions are embodied [Patterson24].

By the way, operational CCI subsumes performance per Watt since
                                                       𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
                                𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝐶𝐼 = 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒/ 𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑡 (𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑)

Electricity Emissions Factor represents the amount of GHG emitted per unit of electricity consumed (e.g.,
gCO2e/kWh).

Given FLOPs for a task, CCI also offers a ballpark estimate of emissions. For example, training GPT-3 took
~3.14✕1023 FLOPs and TPU v5p’s CCI is 265✕10-18 gCO2e, so emissions is just their product: ~83✕106
gCO2e or ~83 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions (mtCO2e).

Performance per Watt only helps with operational emissions while CCI specifies performance per Watt and
embodied emissions and makes it easy to estimate carbon emissions.


Conclusion: Architectural Stability For Five Generations Despite Improved
Scale, Resilience, Power Efficiency, and Sustainability
This paper recaps the evolution and lasting effectiveness of Google's training TPUs across five generations,
from TPU v2 to Ironwood (TPU 7). Key advancements over an eight-year period demonstrate significant
scaling despite the end of Dennard Scaling and the decline of Moore’s Law: HBM capacity and bandwidth
increased 10x, supercomputer size grew 36X, and peak TPU node performance improved 100x, which
multiplied together yields a 3600x increase in peak supercomputer performance. These gains were achieved
while also enhancing resilience.

Optical circuit switches (OCSes) significantly reduce deployment time and improve scheduling efficiency by
enabling modular installation and fault isolation. Another benefit is to improve availability by mapping out
failures to restore the 3D Torus topology. Without OCS, we would likely need a failure strategy per rack, likely
necessitating a very different network topology. The downsides of this alternative include increased TCO
[Jouppi23] and exacerbating the “rackification” and subsequent cooling problems by making each rack include
spare TPUs and standalone crossbar switches, which could use nearly half the rack space. OCSes also allow
any number of spare cubes for resilience, which can be adjusted based on component reliability in the field vs
when deployed with a fixed number of spare TPUs per rack. Most importantly, OCSes simplify programming by
maintaining a single tier network across the pod while allowing the swapping out of failed components instead
of having to program a two-tier network with different bandwidth and latency per level.

Ironwood also introduced hardware-based mitigations—functional built-in self-test and hardware replay—to
combat silent data corruption and to ensure higher reliability in compute datapath operations.

In this era of limited electricity for new data centers, performance per Watt superseded performance per TCO.
The 30x peak performance per TDP Watt improvement across generations—notably 6X for Ironwood from
TPU v5p—indicates Google's ongoing dedication to reduced environmental impact alongside increased
computational power. We encourage architects to embrace compute carbon intensity (CCI). CCI reflects a
more holistic approach—as it encompasses both embodied and operational emissions whereas performance
per Watt only covers operational emissions—and it simplifies estimates of environmental impact of AI.
                                                                                                               11
Despite initial skepticism regarding the longevity of an ASIC domain-specific architecture given rapidly evolving
DNNs, the initial TPU v2 microarchitecture demonstrated remarkable stability and adaptability. Stability means
model, compiler, and software stack optimizations from prior TPUs are easily reused for new TPUs. TPUs have
successfully accommodated rapidly changing and diverse workloads over a decade, including Transformers and
Diffusion. Listed by order of importance, six key initial decisions have proven their worth through their longevity
in TPUs and by their adoption by other AI training accelerators that followed:
    1.​ Systolic Arrays for matrix multiplies.
    2.​ Range-oriented, narrow floating point arithmetic (BF16, FP8, FP4) versus precision-oriented, wide
        IEEE floating point arithmetic (FP16, FP32, FP64).
    3.​ HBM for main memory.
    4.​ Custom high speed links (in our case ICI) to assemble AI accelerators into AI supercomputers.
    5.​ Software control of the memory hierarchy via DMAs with scratchpad SRAM versus a conventional
        CPU-like cache hierarchy.
    6.​ Vector Units to perform the non matrix computations.

To our best knowledge, two other innovations—OCSes and SparseCores—remain unique to TPUs. The TPU’s
VLIW instruction word allowed our compilers and software ecosystem to deliver optimized compilation
performance with deterministic timing; while some accelerators also use VLIW, others picked very different
approaches to control. Google has used liquid cooling exclusively for training since TPU v3 in 2018, while
others generally come in both liquid-cooled and slower, lower-power, air-cooled versions. And there is no
agreement on the number of processors per accelerator; a conservative range is at least 2 to 1472 [Jouppi23].

In the 1960s, conventional CPU wisdom converged on microcoded, backwards binary compatible instruction
sets with cache memory—which the IBM 360 pioneered—then switched in the 1990s to superscalar,
speculative, out-of-order architectures after the pathbreaking Intel Pentium Pro. Perhaps the six features above
will be considered the defining features of training accelerators of the 2020s? We hope that the TPU
architecture, designed for AI, will follow the IBM 360 and x86 that many decades later are still useful for their
intended markets, business data processing and personal computing.

In conclusion, TPUs offer a potent combination of five strengths:
    1.​ Having only two large processors per TPU—which compilers can unify to offer an even larger single
        Megacore [JAX24]—that gobble huge chunks of data simplifies developing new models versus
        programming numerous tiny processors that nibble small bites of data. As supercomputer legend
        Seymour Cray famously asked: “If you were plowing a field, which would you rather use: two strong
        oxen or 1024 chickens?”
    2.​ Architectural stability plus hardware/software codesign inside a single organization means
        tuned models are available immediately as new TPUs debut versus a much larger external effort
        that can’t start until new accelerators are officially released.
    3.​ O(10,000) supercomputer size in a single tier network with enhanced resilience allows training
        of long-running giant models across multiple supercomputers in multiple regions at >90%
        goodput simply by using data parallelism [Gemini25].
    4.​ A track record of increasing compute, memory capacity, memory and interconnect bandwidth,
        and supercomputer size each generation for five generations.
    5.​ Reduced environmental impact via decreased emissions per floating point operation [Schneider25]
        [Huang26].
These advantages position TPUs to deliver the computational requirements needed to sustainably unleash AI’s
huge potential.



                                                                                                                12
Acknowledgments
We extend our sincere gratitude to the numerous Googlers who developed TPU hardware and software over
the past decade. Thanks to Ramdas Nagarajan for help on SDC and FBIST, to Ravi Ragnar for the latest DNN
mix, and for reviews from Prashant Chandra, James Laudon, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and the anonymous
Micro reviewers.

References
[Jouppi17] Jouppi, Norman, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, et al. “In-data center Performance Analysis of a
Tensor Processing Unit.” 44th International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2017.
[Jouppi18] Jouppi, Norman, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, and David Patterson. "Motivation for and Evaluation of the First
Tensor Processing Unit." Micro, 38(3), 2018.
[Babbage24] Babbage, “Google's First Tensor Processing Unit: Architecture.” The Chip Newsletter, 2024.
[Metz18] Metz, Cade, “Big Bets of AI Open a New Frontier for Chip Startups, Too,” New York Times, 2018.
[Fuchs19] Fuchs, Adi, and David Wentzlaff. "The Accelerator Wall: Limits Of Chip Specialization." International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture, 2019.

[Huang26] Huang, Keguo and David Patterson, AI infrastructure efficiency: Ironwood TPUs deliver 3.7x carbon efficiency
gains, April 6, 2026, Google Cloud Blog.
[Norrie21] Norrie, Thomas, Nishant Patil, Doe Hyun Yoon, George Kurian, Sheng Li, James Laudon, Cliff Young, Norman
Jouppi, and David Patterson. "The Design Process For Google's Training Chips: TPU v2 and TPU v3." Micro, 41(2), 2021.
[Jouppi23] Jouppi, Norman, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay
Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, Clifford Young, Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou, and David Patterson. "TPU v4: An
Optically Reconfigurable Supercomputer for Machine Learning with Hardware Support for Embeddings." 50th ISCA, 2023.
[JAX24] The JAX Authors, JAX: TPU Pipelining, 2024.
[Vahdat24] Vahdat, Amin, Xiaoyu Ma, and David Patterson, “New Computer Evaluation Metrics for a Changing World.”
CACM, 67(10), 2024.
[Patterson24] Patterson, David, Jeffrey Gilbert, Marco Gruteser, Efren Robles, Krishna Sekar, Yong Wei, and Tenghui Zhu.
"Energy and Emissions of Machine Learning on Smartphones vs. the Cloud." CACM, 67(2), 2024.
[Schneider25] Schneider, Ian, Hui Xu, Stephan Benecke, David Patterson, Keguo Huang, Parthasarathy Ranganathan,
and Cooper Elsworth. "An Introduction to Life-Cycle Emissions of AI hardware." Micro, 45(5), 2024.
[George26] George, Nishant, et al. “Silent Data Corruption in AI.” IEEE Micro, 46(1), 2026,
[Gemini23] Gemini Team, "Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal Models," 2023.
[Gemini25] Gemini Team, “Gemini 2.5: Pushing the Frontier,” 2025.




                                                                                                                           13
