2. IPU hardware overview — IPU Programmer's Guide
IPU Programmer's Guide
Version: latest
1. Introduction
2. IPU hardware overview
2.1. Memory architecture
2.2. Execution
2.3. Tile architecture
2.3.1. On-tile memory
2.4. Host/device communication
3. Programming model
3.1. The Poplar graph libary
3.2. Programs
3.2.1. Data variables
3.2.2. Copying data and executing compute sets
3.2.3. Control flow: sequences, conditionals and loops
3.2.4. Compute sets
3.2.5. The computational graph
3.2.6. Data streams
3.2.7. IPU-level task parallelism
3.2.7.1. Overlapping I/O within the IPU
3.3. Loading and running programs
3.4. The implementation of ML frameworks using IPU programs
3.5. The compilation and execution of IPU programs
3.5.1. Variable liveness
4. Programming tools
4.1. Using a machine learning framework
4.2. Writing IPU programs directly
4.3. Adding custom operations to ML frameworks
4.4. Compilation
4.5. Executing programs
4.6. Profiling and analysing programs
4.7. Further Reading
5. Common algorithmic techniques for IPUs
5.1. Replication
5.1.1. Replication in ML training
5.1.2. Replication in ML inference
5.1.3. Using multiple processes on the host or multiple hosts
5.1.3.1. Replicated tensor sharding
5.2. Gradient accumulation
5.3. Recomputation
5.4. Model parallelism and pipelining (multi-IPU execution)
5.4.1. A simple example
5.4.2. Efficient pipelining
5.4.3. Memory stashes and recomputation
5.4.4. Interleaved schedule pipelining
5.4.5. Further reading on pipelining
5.5. Machine learning techniques on IPU hardware
5.5.1. Batch size terminology
6. Trademarks & copyright
IPU Programmer's Guide
Search help
Note: Searching from the top-level index page will search all documents. Searching from a specific document will search only that document.
Find an exact phrase: Wrap your search phrase in "" (double quotes) to only get results where the phrase is exactly matched. For example "PyTorch for the IPU" or "replicated tensor sharding"
Prefix query: Add an * (asterisk) at the end of any word to indicate a prefix query. This will return results containing all words with the specific prefix. For example tensor*
Fuzzy search: Use ~N (tilde followed by a number) at the end of any word for a fuzzy search. This will return results that are similar to the search word. N specifies the “edit distance” (fuzziness) of the match. For example Polibs~1
Words close to each other:
~N (tilde followed by a number) after a phrase (in quotes) returns results where the words are close to each other. N is the maximum number of positions allowed between matching words. For example "ipu version"~2
Logical operators. You can use the following logical operators in a search:
+ signifies AND operation
| signifies OR operation
- negates a single word or phrase (returns results without that word or phrase)
() controls operator precedence
2. IPU hardware overview
The IPU is based on a highly parallel architecture designed to accelerate
machine learning applications. It provides very high floating-point performance
on mixed-precision floating-point data. The floating-point calculations are performed in
either IEEE 754 single-precision floating-point or half-precision floating-point. The white paper contains details about all aspects of IPU floating-point number representation and arithmetic.
The IPU has a unique memory architecture consisting of large amounts of
In-Processor-Memory™ within the IPU made up of SRAM (organised as a set of
smaller independent distributed memory units) and a set of attached DRAM chips
which can transfer to the In-Processor-Memory via explicit copies within the
software. The memory contained in the external DRAM chips is referred to as
Streaming Memory™. This memory organisation allows very fast and flexible data communication using
In-Processor-Memory, which can hold much more data within the IPU than other
processors, whilst also having the ability to use the Streaming Memory for a
large data store.
IPUs are used alongside either one or several host computers which load code
onto one or more IPUs and then instruct them to execute that code. This allows
the host(s) to offload computation tasks to the IPUs. The IPUs can then transfer
data to and from the host memory.
The IPU-Machine (Fig. 2.1) is a compute platform consisting of a 1U chassis that includes four IPUs and up to 260 GB of memory. IPU-Machines are used as building blocks to make larger compute Pod systems such as the Bow Pod16 which has 4 Bow-2000 IPU-Machines or the Bow Pod256 which has 64 Bow-2000 IPU-Machines.
A single IPU can carry out a wide range of machine learning or artificial intelligence tasks. Multiple IPUs can be used together on a single task. In this case they communicate through the IPU-Fabric, which consists of IPU-Links for directly connecting IPUs and GW-Links for connecting racks of IPU-Machines via the IPU-Gateways.
Fig. 2.1 Example of an IPU-Machine. The Bow-2000 is a building block for Bow Pod systems.
The IPU itself (Fig. 2.2) is made up of many independent processing
units, called tiles (Section 2.3, Tile architecture). All the tiles are connected
to an ultra-fast, all-to-all communication network called the exchange fabric.
When multiple IPUs are connected together, the exchange fabric extends to all
tiles on all of the IPUs.
Fig. 2.2 IPU internal architecture
2.1. Memory architecture
The memory in an IPU-based machine is made up of In-Processor-Memory and Streaming
Memory.
The In-Processor-Memory consists of the IPU’s local SRAM and is split into
multiple disjoint memory units — one per tile — each of which has its own
address space. The load/store instructions on a tile can only address the local
memory on that tile. Code is also stored in the local tile memory and each tile
will only execute code from its local memory.
The Streaming Memory is made up of several DDR memory chips. The tiles cannot execute load and store instructions to this memory directly.
Fig. 2.3 IPU memory architecture
Data is moved between the memory on different tiles of the same IPU and between
Streaming Memory and tile memory via explicit data movement instructions on the
tiles which use the IPU’s exchange fabric. Before these instructions execute to
perform the data movement, all the tiles must synchronise together.
Synchronisation guarantees that all tiles have completed performing their
compute tasks and are ready for data exchange.
2.2. Execution
When a program executes on an IPU, the tiles within the IPU alternate between
exchanging data and performing compute on their local data.
The IPU uses the bulk-synchronous parallel (BSP) model of execution where the
execution of a task is split into steps. Each step consists of the following
phases:
local tile compute
global cross-tile synchronisation
data exchange
In the compute phase, all tiles execute in parallel, operating on their local
data. After each tile finishes executing, it starts a synchronisation process to
synchronise with the other tiles. When all tiles have reached this point, all
the tiles will be synchronised and the IPU enters the exchange phase where data
is copied between the tiles.
Fig. 2.4 Phases of task execution
After the exchange phase, the process repeats: the tiles move into a new compute
phase, performing computation using their local data and the new data received
during the exchange.
The program continues by executing a series of such steps, alternating between
exchange and compute phases. Viewed as a timeline, we can see that each tile
repeatedly performs the sequence of sync, exchange and compute, as shown in
Fig. 2.5.
Fig. 2.5 Multiple phases in steps
Each step occurs in parallel across all tiles, but the whole IPU can be viewed
as executing a sequence of steps in a serial fashion, each consisting of the
sync, exchange and compute phases.
Fig. 2.6 Sync, exchange and compute activity across tiles
Fig. 2.6 shows a few tiles executing the steps. In the
Popvision Graph Analyser we
can see traces of activity across all 1472 tiles on an IPU for example in
Fig. 2.7.
Fig. 2.7 Execution activity of all tiles in IPU
2.3. Tile architecture
Each tile consists of a single multi-threaded processor and its local memory.
The processor has two modes: supervisor and worker. At most one of the threads
of the processor can run in supervisor mode and the thread running in supervisor
mode can spawn other threads to run in worker mode. It is the supervisor thread that runs the top level control program for that tile. This thread implements the main program running over the set of IPUs executing an application. Section 3, Programming model contains details about the overall program model and how the supervisor programs combine to implement the main program running over a set of IPUs.
A task running on a worker thread will execute and when complete will exit —
making the thread available for the supervisor to spawn a new task. It can happen that the supervisor spawns a task and all other threads are executing. In this case, the supervisor mode thread is suspended and is used for a worker task. The supervisor code will resume when a worker task completes and frees a thread.
The threads are executed by the processor in an instruction-by-instruction fixed
order, each thread taking a turn in a “round-robin” fashion.
The processor instruction set used by the workers when executing tasks
has been designed from scratch for machine learning and artificial intelligence.
The instruction set contains:
Control flow instructions (jumps, conditionals, and so on) that can execute
arbitrary control flow. The control flow on each processor is independent from
those on the other processors.
Memory access instructions
Arithmetic instructions for integers and floating-point operations. The
floating-point instructions are designed for high compute workloads and
include single-precision (32 bit) and half-precision (16 bit) floating-point
operations. The floating-point operations can be vectorised in small vectors of sizes 2, 4 and 8. In addition, there is an accumulating matrix product unit (the AMP
unit) on each tile that can perform up to 64 multiply-accumulate operations
per cycle.
Instructions to compute common transcendental functions (for example, the
exponential function)
Instructions for random number generation. The random number generator is also
connected to the floating-point unit to enable stochastic rounding in hardware
when performing floating-point arithmetic.
Most worker instructions take one compute cycle to execute. This means that
when the processor schedules that thread again, the next instruction can
execute. Refer to the Tile Vertex Instruction Set Architecture for a list of the worker instructions that take more than one compute cycle to execute.
2.3.1. On-tile memory
Each tile on the IPU has on-tile memory. The details of the memory is dependent on the exact IPU.
For the GC200, each tile has 624 kilobytes of SRAM. This means that an IPU with
1,472 tiles has just under 900 MB of In-Processor-Memory in total.
Each tile uses a contiguous unsigned 21-bit address space, beginning at address
0x0. In practice, only a part of this memory space is populated with memory with
the available memory starting at address 0x4C000 and ending at 0xE7FFF.
The memory is organised as two regions each made up of several 64-bit wide
banks. Concurrent accesses can be made to different banks, while multiple
accesses to the same bank must be sequential.
The banks in region 1 are interleaved, with bit 3 of the address selecting
64-bit words from alternating odd and even banks. Interleaving allows two 64-bit
aligned addresses to be accessed simultaneously if they are an odd number of
words apart. This means, for example, that an instruction can perform a 128-bit
load as this reads the consecutive words from two different banks.
All loads and stores must be naturally aligned. Instructions can only be fetched
from region 0.
Fig. 2.8 IPU tile memory
For more details, refer to the Tile Vertex Instruction Set Architecture.
2.4. Host/device communication
IPUs can receive data from and send data to the memory of the host computer connected to the IPU.
On the IPU-Machine this is achieved via RDMA (remote direct memory access) over
Ethernet. The RDMA NIC (network interface card) on the chassis containing the
host computer will transfer data over Ethernet to an RDMA NIC on the IPU-Machine. On the IPU-Machine, the NIC will read data from and write data to DDR memory. The IPU will
then read and write to that DDR memory during its exchange phase. The IPU will bridge
the exchange messages to read packets from and write packets to the DDR memory. This
communication architecture can be seen in Fig. 2.9.
Fig. 2.9 Host to IPU communication
Previous
Next
Revision 2ed121c4.