3. Programming model — IPU Programmer's Guide
IPU Programmer's Guide
Version: latest
1. Introduction
2. IPU hardware overview
2.1. Memory architecture
2.2. Execution
2.3. Tile architecture
2.3.1. On-tile memory
2.4. Host/device communication
3. Programming model
3.1. The Poplar graph libary
3.2. Programs
3.2.1. Data variables
3.2.2. Copying data and executing compute sets
3.2.3. Control flow: sequences, conditionals and loops
3.2.4. Compute sets
3.2.5. The computational graph
3.2.6. Data streams
3.2.7. IPU-level task parallelism
3.2.7.1. Overlapping I/O within the IPU
3.3. Loading and running programs
3.4. The implementation of ML frameworks using IPU programs
3.5. The compilation and execution of IPU programs
3.5.1. Variable liveness
4. Programming tools
4.1. Using a machine learning framework
4.2. Writing IPU programs directly
4.3. Adding custom operations to ML frameworks
4.4. Compilation
4.5. Executing programs
4.6. Profiling and analysing programs
4.7. Further Reading
5. Common algorithmic techniques for IPUs
5.1. Replication
5.1.1. Replication in ML training
5.1.2. Replication in ML inference
5.1.3. Using multiple processes on the host or multiple hosts
5.1.3.1. Replicated tensor sharding
5.2. Gradient accumulation
5.3. Recomputation
5.4. Model parallelism and pipelining (multi-IPU execution)
5.4.1. A simple example
5.4.2. Efficient pipelining
5.4.3. Memory stashes and recomputation
5.4.4. Interleaved schedule pipelining
5.4.5. Further reading on pipelining
5.5. Machine learning techniques on IPU hardware
5.5.1. Batch size terminology
6. Trademarks & copyright
IPU Programmer's Guide
Search help
Note: Searching from the top-level index page will search all documents. Searching from a specific document will search only that document.
Find an exact phrase: Wrap your search phrase in "" (double quotes) to only get results where the phrase is exactly matched. For example "PyTorch for the IPU" or "replicated tensor sharding"
Prefix query: Add an * (asterisk) at the end of any word to indicate a prefix query. This will return results containing all words with the specific prefix. For example tensor*
Fuzzy search: Use ~N (tilde followed by a number) at the end of any word for a fuzzy search. This will return results that are similar to the search word. N specifies the “edit distance” (fuzziness) of the match. For example Polibs~1
Words close to each other:
~N (tilde followed by a number) after a phrase (in quotes) returns results where the words are close to each other. N is the maximum number of positions allowed between matching words. For example "ipu version"~2
Logical operators. You can use the following logical operators in a search:
+ signifies AND operation
| signifies OR operation
- negates a single word or phrase (returns results without that word or phrase)
() controls operator precedence
3. Programming model
This section describes the IPU abstract programming model, as well as techniques for compiling and running IPU programs.
3.1. The Poplar graph libary
The programming model described in this section is implemented in the Poplar
graph library (libpoplar). This library provides an API for constructing and
running IPU programs and performs the necessary compilation to run the programs
on IPU devices. Refer to the Poplar and PopLibs User Guide for more information.
3.2. Programs
Programs run over a set of IPUs. This set is user configurable and is chosen before the program is compiled. The set of IPUs running a program does not change over the course of the program’s execution.
A single program runs across all the selected IPUs. This program will follow a path of
specified control flow and manipulate variables just like a standard program for
a CPU. The variables being manipulated are large arrays of data (which are often
interpreted as multi-dimensional tensors) that live across the various memory
elements of the IPUs and Streaming Memory. The program manipulates these
variables with a set of highly parallel tasks (called vertices)
executed on the threads of the tile processors. These sets of tasks are
known as compute sets. Fig. 3.1 shows the overall
structure of programs on the IPU.
Fig. 3.1 Programs running on a set of IPUs
Note that even though the program runs across all IPUs, the IPU is not a SIMD
device. There is not a single machine-level instruction stream that is
distributed to the IPUs. Instead, the IPUs synchronise at known points to run
the program. This allows the flexibility for completely different code to run on every parallel thread between synchronisation points.
3.2.1. Data variables
Variables hold data whilst a program is executed. On each set of tiles, the programs manipulate typed arrays (of fixed size). For example, a variable could be an array containing 1024 elements of type float (32 bit floating-point numbers).
A single variable may be stored across the memory units of multiple tiles. Each
element of the variable is placed on or “mapped” to a specific tile. This is called the tile mapping of the variable.
Fig. 3.2 A variable and its mapping to tiles
Variables always have global scope. They can be read or written at any part of
the program, but the physical memory allocated for a variable might be shared
with other variables that are not needed at the same time
(Section 3.5.1, Variable liveness).
When ML programs manipulate variables, it is often useful to view them as
multi-dimensional tensors. In this case, different parts of the program may want
to view the base variable as a different kind of tensor (for example, viewing a
matrix as either row-major or column-major). So, for programs on the IPU, a
tensor is a view onto an underlying variable.
Fig. 3.3 Multiple views on the same variable
Looking at variables as multi-dimensional tensors is extremely useful for
building the access patterns needed to run programs on the IPU. However, the
data manipulation still happens on the underlying variable in memory.
Variables can be stored across the tiles and in Streaming
Memory (Section 2.1, Memory architecture).
The Poplar graph library provides a rich set of operators for creating tensor
views of variables including slicing, transposition and concatenation to build
up tensors. Refer to the Poplar Tensor API for details.
3.2.2. Copying data and executing compute sets
As a program executes on a tile set it will manipulate the variables in the
program. There are two main ways of doing this: copying data and executing compute sets.
The most basic copying involves just copying one variable to another, for
example:
Copy(v1, v2);
However, copying can also include rearrangements of fixed patterns. This can be
done via the tensor views described in Section 3.2.1, Data variables. For example,
copying from a transposed view will perform a transpose copy:
Copy(t1.tranpose(), t2);
Here, t1.transpose() just provides a view of the rearranged data elements but by using it as the source of the copy operation to a new variable, it will actually perform the rearrangement and will move the data in memory.
Compute sets execute code to manipulate data. Each compute set has a name:
Execute(cs1)
When a compute set runs, it reads, computes and writes a set of variable elements from the variables of the program:
Fig. 3.4 A compute set
Note
The variable elements that are accessed by any particular compute set are
fixed — they cannot vary on each execution.
A compute set may perform many different computations, for example incrementing
every element of a variable. How the program specifies what function the compute
set executes is described in Section 3.2.4, Compute sets.
3.2.3. Control flow: sequences, conditionals and loops
In addition to the basic operations of copying data and executing compute sets,
programs running on the IPU can execute standard control flow: loops,
conditionals etc. For example:
Listing 3.1 Example of control flow
while(v1 < v2):
copy(t1, t2);
execute(cs1);
if (v3 < v4):
copy(t2, t3);
else:
copy(t3, t2);
execute(cs2);
Here the variables used for control flow are tensors of size 1 (that is, scalars) mapped to standard variables (for example, v1 in
Listing 3.1) that can be manipulated by compute sets.
The overall control flow defined by the program is the same for all tiles on all IPUs. Conceptually, there is a single program which defines the global control flow applied to all the IPUs in the system. Note however, that this global program is decoupled from the computation performed by each vertex in the graph (as explained at the beginning of the chapter, the machine is not SIMD, every vertex can be running an independent program).
Each tile can take a different path through the program. It will decide which branch of a conditional to execute, or how many iterations of a loop to execute, depending on its local data.
Fig. 3.5 The entire system of IPUs runs a single program
3.2.4. Compute sets
A compute set is a highly parallel piece of compute. Each compute set
consists of many vertices that are compute tasks. Each vertex within the
compute set executes a piece of code in parallel to the other vertices. So, in
Fig. 3.4, the compute set that performs computation and reads and writes variables is actually a set of vertices running in parallel,
each one of which reads and writes variables and performs computation.
Fig. 3.6 The vertices within a compute set
The vertices determine how a compute set splits its tasks into fine-grained,
parallel pieces of compute to use the many tiles and worker threads on the IPU.
Each vertex is tied to a specific tile of the IPU.
Each vertex runs a small piece of code (separate to the main program) that
processes its own input and output. The piece of code that a vertex runs
is known as a codelet. The combination of each vertex running this code in
parallel is what defines the function of the compute set. More information on
programming vertices can be found in the Poplar and PopLibs User Guide.
3.2.5. The computational graph
The vertices from the multiple compute sets in a program form the computational
graph of the program as in Fig. 3.7.
Fig. 3.7 Graph representation of variables and processing
This graph holds the relationship between compute and data which is explicit and
created with the program. The graph shows the data relationships but not the
control flow of the program.
3.2.6. Data streams
Programs running on the IPU have access to connections to external data. These
data streams allow the program to copy data from an external source (usually
the memory of a host computer) into a variable of a program.
Listing 3.2 Example of a data stream copy in a program
..
stream-copy(s1, v1)
execute(cs)
copy(v1, v2)
The configuration of how data is provided or consumed from data streams is
configured by the host when the program is executed (see
Section 3.3, Loading and running programs).
Since data stream copies generally go through multiple memories (host memory and
Streaming Memory) before getting to the IPU, there are several
implementation-specific flags to optimise the transfer (for example, enabling
overlap of the memory transfers by prefetching data). Details of these options
can be found in the Poplar and PopLibs User Guide
and a practical discussion of how these optimisations can apply to an
application can be found in The Memory and Performance Optimisation Guide.
3.2.7. IPU-level task parallelism
As well as the fine-grained parallelism at each compute set, the program running
on a set of IPUs can also be split into parallel sub-programs via fork-join
style parallelism.
Since all tiles within an IPU are grouped together for synchronisation, the
parallelisation of the program works at a granularity where the individual
sub-programs run on different IPUs. Fig. 3.8 shows this.
Fig. 3.8 A program splitting into parallel sub-programs
This capability is used for several programming techniques, such as pipeline
model parallelism, and is described in Section 5, Common algorithmic techniques for IPUs.
3.2.7.1. Overlapping I/O within the IPU
In addition to the general method of running programs in parallel on different
IPUs, a limited form of task parallelism can be executed within the IPU. The
IPU can be split into two sets of tile groups. One tile group only performs I/O
to fetch and receive data from outside of the chip and the other tile group can
perform general compute. The program is then split into two sub-programs to run
in parallel with one of the sub-programs just running a sequence of either data
stream or copies to and from variables held in Streaming Memory onto the tile group
dedicated to I/O.
Fig. 3.9 Parallel execution of I/O
3.3. Loading and running programs
A multi-IPU device will always be connected to a host which controls the
compilation and execution of programs.
First, the host will construct a set of programs to run on a set of IPUs. These
programs are then compiled together into a binary which is then loaded onto the
IPUs.
Fig. 3.10 Loading programs on to the IPU
In addition to loading the programs, the host needs to configure what happens when a program reads from or writes to one of its data streams. This is done
up-front by the host application which will either connect a datastream to a data source (for example, a region of host memory) or to a handler on the host which
will deal with data stream requests from the IPU.
Once the programs are loaded and configured, the host can then instruct the IPUs
to run one of the programs.
Fig. 3.11 Selecting a control program to run
At this point the IPUs will execute the entire selected program.
During this program’s execution, the IPUs can read and write data from data streams. For example, the program can issue instructions to pull items of training data onto the IPU when training a neural network model (the model itself is already resident on the processor).
3.4. The implementation of ML frameworks using IPU programs
Higher-level machine-learning frameworks such as PyTorch and TensorFlow let
you specify computational graphs that provide models of external phenomena.
These graphs have learnable parameters which the frameworks can then train with
an optimisation algorithm specified in the framework that consumes training
data.
The implementation flow from a typical high-level framework to an IPU program is
shown in Fig. 3.12.
Fig. 3.12 A typical framework lowering to run on an IPU
The framework will perform transformations on the computational graph, add the
backward passes and optimiser loops to that graph and finally schedule the graph
such that each node is computed in a particular order. Once a scheduled graph is
in place, it can be translated into an IPU program where each node is replaced
by the execution of compute sets.
3.5. The compilation and execution of IPU programs
The program executed on an IPU is conceptually executed across all the IPUs
together. However, the IPUs have completely disjoint memories (Fig. 2.3) and
so do not have direct access to a shared state.
This means that the program cannot be passed through a conventional compiler
to execute on the set of tiles. Instead the program is first lowered
into a form that matches IPU chip execution (consisting of sync, exchange and compute
as described in Section 2.2, Execution).
Fig. 3.13 Lowering a program to explicit sync, exchange and compute steps
The global program is then lowered to a program for each tile with explicit
synchronisation and communication steps on each tile.
Fig. 3.14 Lowering a program to multiple tiles
After this lowering, each tile has its own version of the program. This version:
Only reads and writes data in its own tile memory
Contains explicit synchronisation instructions to other tiles
Contains data communication routines to exchange with other tiles
Just runs that tile’s vertices when executing a compute set
This lowering is done by the Poplar graph library. The result is a per-tile
program that can be compiled with a conventional compiler to run on the tile.
Note that although this lowering occurs, due to the synchronisation between
tiles it is still possible to view the execution as a global execution across
all the tiles. This is the view the PopVision Graph Analyser tool shows, for
example.
3.5.1. Variable liveness
Within the program, all the variables are global. The variables are stored either in Streaming Memory or across the tile array
(where they will have multiple addresses in tile memory for each region of the variable stored on different tiles).
Despite the global scope of the variables, the variables do not all have
distinct addresses for their regions in tile or Streaming Memory — they can
overlap and some variables will share the same region of memory. This is possible because the inputs and outputs of each step of the program are known and so the liveness of each variable (that is, at which points in the execution of the program the variable is needed) is known during compilation. This allows the compiler to allocate variables that are not live at the same time to the same memory address.
At each point during program execution, a number of the variables will be live. This is equivalent to the size
of a memory heap in dynamically allocated systems. The live variable memory size is the amount of temporary memory
being used at that time. Some variables are always live — they always contain data that may be used later and these
will have distinct addresses in memory.
The PopVision Graph Analyser shows the live memory and alway live memory as a program executes. The following snapshot
shows this to give an idea of how memory usage varies during program execution.
Fig. 3.15 Live variable memory over time
Previous
Next
Revision 2ed121c4.