SambaNova SN40L Reconfigurable Dataflow Unit
The innovative chip that powers the fastest and most efficient inference platform

The fourth generation SambaNova Reconfigurable Dataflow Unit
(RDU), the SN40L, is the heart of the SambaRack system. Purpose
built to power the largest and most accurate generative and agentic AI
workloads, the SN40L RDU enables the SambaNova platform to
deliver extraordinary inference performance on the best and latest
open-source AI models, in a very compact footprint, with ultra-low
power consumption, and no need for costly and exotic cooling
infrastructure.

Complementing GPUs - The need for high speed
inference
AI workloads are experiencing a transition from
model training to inference. As organizations move
from experimenting with AI workloads to putting them
in production, the need for high speed inference has
become more crucial than ever.
GPUs have been the driving force of AI innovation for
years. Their ability to perform parallel processing with
extreme performance is ideal for AI model training
and they will continue to be used for this. This has
allowed GPUs to drive the development of ever larger
AI models and GPU providers have built an extensive        The global AI inference market is predicted to grow
network of developers who will continue to train and             by a CAGR of over 26% through 2030
fine-tune ever larger models with increasing
accuracy.
However, organizations are transitioning from predominantly focusing on model training (teaching a
model about topics) to inference (using the model to perform functions). GPUs are extraordinarily well
suited to model training, which is a data processing challenge. AI inference however, is a data
movement challenge, which requires a different approach.

As the industry continues to evolve, GPUs will likely remain the technology of choice for the training of
new models and fine-tuning of existing ones. This will enable organizations to continue to take advan-
tage of their existing GPU infrastructure. RDUs will then be deployed to serve those models in produc-
tion, delivering the performance that users require.

The SN40L - Designed for Inference
The SambaNova RDU was built specifically to deliver fast and efficient inference performance on both
large individual models and large numbers of models, with very low power consumption and a compact
footprint. Two primary innovations that enable this are its dataflow architecture, which the RDU is based
upon, and a large, three-tier memory design.




© 2025 SambaNova                                                                                    090725-01
Dataflow Architecture
Making it ideal for inference workloads, the SN40L is built with a dataflow architecture. GPUs utilize an
architecture that was not designed for AI inference and requires multiple kernel calls to run AI models.
Essentially what this means is that when running AI models, GPUs have to make multiple, redundant
calls back to memory. This needless overhead adds latency and slows the process down. In
comparison, the RDU utilizes a dataflow architecture that combines multiple operations into a single
kernel call which can handle all of the compute operations. In effect, data flows from one step of the
process to the next, without calling back to memory. The result is the elimination of the additional
overhead incurred from launching multiple kernels, significantly accelerating AI model processing.
Further, GPUs have low data locality,
meaning that data is not always stored near
where it is processed. This leads to
inefficiencies as the system spends time moving
data around. RDUs, with a three tier memory
design, have high data locality which reduces
the time spent moving data and increases
efficiency.


Three-Tier Memory
The SN40L has a three-tier memory design that includes very fast memory (SRAM), high bandwidth
memory (HBM), and very large memory (DRAM). The way AI models are processed is that when a user
enters a prompt, the entire model is loaded onto active memory, then every possible outcome is cal-
culated. The most likely correct response, based on its training data, is then served up to the user. The
model is then removed from active memory and upon the next user prompt the process starts over
again. With other systems, the model is stored in off-chip memory and then loaded into active memory,
incurring needless latency. The SN40L has DRAM to hold large numbers of different models. The HBM
enables the movement of a given model from DRAM to SRAM very quickly, so the time to load and run
a model is drastically reduced. Since models are held in memory, switching between them can be done
almost instantly.

                                                       The inherent efficiency of the SN40L architecture
                                                       means that less power is required to perform
                                                       inference than GPUs. The SambaRack system, which
                                                       is the base system of all SambaNova solutions,
                                                       consumes an average of only 10kW of power and is
                                                       air cooled. This is in contrast to the latest GPU-based
                                                       systems which require as much as 140kW and
                                                       expensive liquid cooling infrastructure.



Conclusion
GPUs will continue to be the technology of choice for AI model training and fine-tuning as they are well
suited to that workload. As AI transitions from training to inference, RDUs will become the processor of
choice for those workloads. The SambaNova SN40L RDU is the right choice for fast, efficient AI infer-
ence.




SambaNova is the leading purpose-built AI system for generative and agentic AI implementations, from chips to
models that gives enterprises full control over their model and private data. We take the best models, optimize
them for fast tokens and higher batch sizes, the largest inputs and enable customizations to deliver value
with simplicity.

© 2025 SambaNova                                                                                        090725-01
