Introducing UALink 200G 1.0 Specification
By: Nathan Kalyanasundharam
AMD Corporate Fellow and UALink Consortium Technical Task Force Co-Chair

Ultra Accelerator Link™ (UALink™) is a new industry standard to enable scale-up interconnects for next
generation AI workloads. The UALink 200G 1.0 Specification was initially developed by the UALink
Consortium Promoter Group Members from Alibaba, AMD, Apple, Astera Labs, AWS, Cisco, Google,
HPE, Intel, Meta, Microsoft, and Synopsys and is now also supported and adopted by more than 70
Contributor and Adopter Members.


Introduc on
AI models are rapidly growing, demanding higher compute, memory, and interconnect performance.
The cost and complexity of delivering reliable scale-up solutions is a significant burden for the entire
industry. Scale-up solutions are critical to distribute AI models across a Pod with 100s of accelerators.
There is a growing demand from the industry to establish standards-based scale-up network solutions
for training and inference workloads. The UALink Consortium’s mission is to establish an open standard
to deliver a scalable, performant, resilient and cost-effective networking solution for scale-up
connections.

UALink is designed to deliver scale-up solutions, optimized for area, latency and power, featuring

         Improved link eﬃciency for bidirec onal memory access to provide maximum data bandwidth
         Decreased Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) by leveraging exis ng Ethernet infrastructure including
         the use of cables, connectors, re mers, and management so ware
         Reduced so ware complexity using memory seman cs with direct read, write, atomic
         transac ons and maintaining the same ordering model to host a ached, local, and remote
         accelerator memory.




                     Figure 1: Multi-Node & Multi-Plane Switching in a Scale-Up Rack Infrastructure
UALink enables scalable interconnect performance to match growth in compute, memory bandwidth
and capacity. Interconnect performance scalability is met by enabling multi-node systems and a multi-
plane switching ecosystem.

The UALink 1.0 specification defines protocols and interfaces for low latency accelerator-to-accelerator
communication.




Overview
The UALink 1.0 specification supports a maximum data rate of 200 GT/s per lane. The signaling rate is
higher at 212.5 GT/s to account for the bandwidth required by Ethernet Layer 1 for Forward Error
Correction Code (FEC) and additional Layer 1 encoding. UALink lanes can be configured into various
groupings: a single-lane Link (x1 Link), a dual-lane Link (x2 Link), or a quad-lane Link (x4 Link). A group of
four lanes constitutes a Station, offering a maximum bandwidth of 800 Gbps each in transmit (TX) and
receive (RX) directions. The number of accelerators and bandwidth allocated to each accelerator can be
scaled to meet the demands of AI applications. Figure 2 shares the high-level features and goals for
UALink based accelerator systems.

                                      Applications                             UALink TL / DL Features & Goals
                                 OS/Drivers/Libraries
                                                                               • Fixed Payloads (64B/640B)
                                                                               • Virtual Channels
                                   Accelerator Core                            • Link Layer Retransmission (LLR)
                                                                               • Credit-Based Flow Control
                                          Security                             • Same address ordering
      TL/Protocol                                                              • Target Low Latency Operation
        unique to                UALink TL / Protocol                            • cable length < 4 meters
          UALink                                                                 • Req-To-Resp RTT < 1µs
                                                                                 • 1-4 racks
                                                                                 • end points <= 1K
                             UALink Link Layer Support
                                                                               • Requests & Responses for
                                                                  Link Layer
                                                                    UALink




   DL is unique to           UALink Logical Link Control                         Multiple src <-> dst pairs can be
           UALink                                                                packed together
                           Link Layer Retry (LLR ; incl. CRC)                  • E2E Encryption & Authentication




                            200Gbps/lane & 100Gbps/lane
                                                                               IEEE P802.3dj Layer 1
                                                                  PHY Layer




                                     FEC Statistics
                                                                   UALink




        Standard                                                               • Standard FEC
    Ethernet PHY               Physical Layer (incl. FEC)                      • Lower latency via 1-way and 2-
                                          PMA                                    way code word interleave
                                                                               • Minor tweaks for 680-Byte FLIT
                                          PMD                                    code word alignment


                                           Figure 2: UALink Features & Goals
Figure 3 depicts a system with multiple nodes, each containing a Host processor and four Accelerators.
The system includes 'M' Accelerators overall, each with 'N' symmetric Ports distributing traffic evenly.
Each System Node is managed by one OS image. UALink Switches (ULS) connect up to 1024 Accelerators
or endpoints. Each Accelerator is assigned a unique 10-bit routing identifier. These connected
Accelerators form a scale-up Pod. Each UALink Switch port connects to a distinct Accelerator. The
number of Switch ports matches the number of connected Accelerators.



 OS- Domain                           Server Node
                      HOST               (SN0)                                                  HOST




       ACC      ACC          ACC    ACC             ‘M’ Accelerators               ACC    ACC          ACC     ACC

   2    …       …            …       …                  ...                   2      …    …            …        …
       N x 2b
                                                                                                             ‘N’ Ports
                                                          UALink
                                                        2b@ 212.5G



                                   M x 2b
                                     …

                                   ULS 1                ...                       ULS N


                                   Figure 3: UALink Based Multi-Accelerator System

A Pod may be partitioned into Virtual Pods. A Virtual Pod is a group of one or more Accelerators in the
Pod that may communicate amongst themselves but not with any other Accelerator in the Pod. The Pod
may be divided into Virtual Pods by partitioning the Switches into non-overlapping subsets of Ports on
each Switch. The Ports within a subset can communicate with one another but not with any Port outside
the subset. Switches provide the mechanisms to configure partitions. All Accelerators in a Pod have a
unique Accelerator ID, regardless of Virtual Pod partitioning.
Link Stack
A UALink stack shown in Figure 4 includes a

         Protocol Layer
         Transac on Layer
         Data Link Layer and
         Physical Layer


               Accelerator                                                 Switch/Accelerator
        Functional/Protocol Layer        UALink Protocol                Functional/Protocol Layer
                                         Layer Interface

                                                  UPLI
           Transaction Layer                                               Transaction Layer
             Protocol FLITs                                                  Protocol FLITs
                                    Transaction Layer Interface

                                         TL FLIT (64B)
               Data Layer                                                         Data Layer
                DL FLITs                                                           DL FLITs         UALink200 Stack
                                     Data Link Layer Interface
                                          DL FLIT (640B)
               Ethernet                                                           Ethernet
               PHY Layer                                                          PHY Layer


                                             212.5G
                                                    DL+FEC (680B)
                                    Serial Link      SerDes



                                                         Figure 4: UALink Stack



Messages between accelerators are transmitted over UALink. UALink is a symmetrical protocol that
supports the same set of messages and channels in both transmit and receive paths. These messages
pass through multiple functional layers of the UALink stack. The UALink Stack consists of an independent
UPLI (UALink Protocol Layer Interface) Originator and an independent UPLI Completer, along with logic
units to implement the UALink Protocol Layers. The Completer and Originator are connected to a
Transport Layer (TL). The TL converts the Protocol Channels into a TL Flit that is passed to the Data Link
(DL) Layer. Similarly, the TL receives a TL Flit from the DL that is unpacked into the UPLI Protocol
Channels received by the Completer and the Originator. A Completer interface receives requests from
peer accelerators and returns responses. An Originator interface initiates requests targeting remote
accelerators and receives responses in return.

The UALink DL receives several TL Flits, adds CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check) protection, a header to the
Flit to form a DL Flit, and passes the DL Flit on to the UALink Physical Layer (PL). Similarly, the DL can
receive DL Flits from the PL, strips the CRC and header from the Flit, and form TL Flits that are passed on
to the TL. The UALink PL receives DL Flits and produces a code word with FEC encoding that is serialized
and transmitted through a serial link. The PL can also receive a serialized code word with FEC from a link
partner on a switch or accelerator to perform FEC decoding and convert that into a DL Flit.



Physical Layer (PL)
The UALink PHY is based on 802.3 Ethernet PHY. UALink is defined for one, two, or four serial lanes
running at a serial rate of 212.5G (200GBASE-KR1/CR1, 400GBASE-KR2/CR2, 800GBASE-KR4/CR4), as
well as a lower speed serial rate option of 106.25G (100GBASE-KR1/CR1, 200GBASE-KR2/CR2,
400GBASE-KR4/CR4).

The * in Figure 5 indicates modifications from IEEE 802.3. The PCS (Physical Coding Sublayer)/PMA
(Physical Medium Attachment Interface) operates in additional codeword interleave modes, with
reduced interleave, to achieve better FEC latency at the cost of decreased burst error correction. The
PMD is unmodified from 802.3. Auto Negotiation and Link Training (AN/LT) is unmodified from 802.3.
The 64B/66B encoding is a subset of what 802.3 supports.

The PCS and RS (Reconciliation Layer - an interface between PCA and DL) require additional behavior to
synchronize DL Flits to codewords, so that 640-byte Flits from the DL fit exactly into one RS (544, 514)
codeword. This will optimize latency and minimize replay Flits. The DL generates a CRC as part of each
640-byte DL Flit.




                                                                                      TL
                                                       Higher Layers                  UPLI
                      OSI                                                             Accelerator
                  Reference
                   Model                         Pacing/rate adaptation
                    layers
                                                    DL-message service
                                                         Flit Packer                   DL
                  Application
                                                     Link Level Replay
                 Presentation                      Reconciliation (RS)*
                    Session
                                                                       64B/66B code*
                   Transport
                                                             PCS*
                   Network                                  PMA*                PHY
                   Data Link                                 PMD

                    Physical                                              MDI

                                                          medium
                                           Figure 5: Physical Layer
Data Link Layer (DL)

The Data Link sits between the Transaction layer and the Physical Layer. The Data Link packs 64-byte
Flits from the transaction layer into 640 Bytes Flits for the Physical Layer. The Data Link also provides a
message service between link partners that originates and terminates at the Data Link layer. The
message service is used for advertising the Transaction Layer rate, querying device and port ID on
connected Link Partner, and other functions. The message service also provides a UART (Universal
Anonymous Receiver Transmitter) style communication between link partners, intended for F/W
(Firmware) communications. The Link level replay is provided on a 640 Byte Flit basis. A 32-bit CRC is
computed, checked, and included as part of the 640 Byte Flit.




                                     Figure 6: Data Link Layer Block Diagram
Transac on Layer (TL)

The Transaction Layer (TL) is responsible for converting protocol messages from the inbound channels of
the two UPLI interfaces (Originator/Completer) into outbound (TX) TL Flits. The TL also converts TL Flits
received from the inbound (RX) DL back into UPLI messages on the UPLI interfaces.




                                      Figure 7: Transaction Layer Interfaces

Figure 7 schematically illustrates the TL Interfaces and their connections between the various channels
for the two UPLI interfaces. It also illustrates the relationship to the Tx and Rx TL Flit Channels. Due to
the symmetry of the interfaces, the format for both the Receive and Transmit Flits is identical. Each 64-
byte Transmit Flit and Receive Flit Channel encodes the information for a UPLI Request Channel,
Originator Data Channel, Read Response/Data Channel, and Write Response Channel.

The Transaction Layer supports a streaming address cache to compress addresses. This enables TL to
achieve a very high bidirectional protocol efficiency where requests and completions are transferred in
both TX and RX directions.
Figure 8 illustrates an example where five write requests, five write completions, and one Flow Control
packet are sent over 21 TL Flits achieving an efficiency of 95.2% (20/21). A compressed request header is
8 Bytes, and a compressed write response and flow control each are 4 Bytes.




                     Figure 8: Write requests with max payload (256B) and completions packing
Security
The UALink security feature, referred to as UALinkSec, is intended to protect traffic on a UALink network
and switches from a physical adversary; the adversary might be present at the time of the attack or may
have placed a device (e.g., an interposer) to snoop or tamper with the UALink traffic. Additionally, in
platforms that support Confidential Computing (CC), UALinkSec protects the Tenant data on a UALink
network and switches from the infrastructure provider and other Tenants co-located on the same
UALink Pod. CC implies that a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) (e.g., Intel TDX, AMD SEV and ARM
CCA) exists on the platform. The TEE under the control of the Tenant is responsible for UALinkSec
configuration. When enabled, UALinkSec provides data confidentiality and optional data integrity
(including replay protection).

UALinkSec supports encryption and authentication of all the UPLI protocol channels – requests, read
responses, and write responses.

                    Accelerator X                                                 Accelerator Y
              Functional/Protocol Layer                                     Functional/Protocol Layer
                                                 UALink Protocol
                                                 Layer Interface

                                                       UPLI
                 Transaction Layer                                              Transaction Layer
                   Protocol FLITs                                                 Protocol FLITs



                     Data Layer                                                    Data Layer
                      DL FLITs                                                      DL FLITs



                     Ethernet                                                      Ethernet
                     PHY Layer                                                     PHY Layer




                                                       ULS
                                                      UALink
                                                      Switch


                                  Figure 9: End-to-End encryption and authentication
Manageability
A UALink Pod is comprised of one or more UALink Accelerators connected via the UALink network and
managed by a UALink Pod Controller. Each Accelerator is hosted on a UALink System Node, and
Accelerator traffic may be routed through the UALink fabric via UALink Switches. Multiple UALink Pods
may be connected to create even larger Accelerator clusters; however, inter-Pod communication and
control is not specified by the UALink specification.

Figure 10 illustrates a possible UALink Pod set up with Switch and Server Platforms. A System node with
four UALink Accelerators (each with three ports), two host CPUs, a NIC, and a BMC is shown. The UALink
Switches are responsible for routing traffic between Accelerators and are managed by
software/firmware called a Switch Management Agent. Physical Switches are implemented in hardware
but may be partitioned into multiple Switches for the purpose of routing and creating Virtual Pods.
Often, Physical Switches are hosted on Switch Platforms that run the Switch Management Agent on a
processor (such as an x86 CPU or a Baseboard Management Controller). The processor is attached to
each Physical Switch via a high-speed interface such as PCIe®, as well as to a network interface for
communication with the Pod Controller.
                                                               REST API                                  GUI


                                                                                    Initialization & Setup
                                                               UALink                 Fault Mgmt & RAS
                           System Node Management Interface    Pod                     Workload Mgmt            Out-of-Band Management Interface
                                                               Controller                 vPod Mgmt
                                                                                    Telemetry & Reports

                                                                       Switch Management Interface


       UALink Pod

                        UALink Switch Platform 1                       UALink Switch Platform 2                          UALink Switch Platform 3
                                 Switch Mgmt                                        Switch Mgmt                                    Switch Mgmt
                  NIC               Agent              BMC       NIC                   Agent              BMC      NIC                Agent              BMC
                                  Processor                                         Processor                                      Processor
               TPM                                              TPM                                               TPM
                                UALink Switch                                  UALink Switch                                    UALink Switch




            Acc           Acc           Acc          Acc       Acc            Acc            Acc         Acc       Acc            Acc            Acc         Acc




                  CPU                          CPU                   CPU                           CPU                    CPU                          CPU
                                Node                                                 Node                                               Node
                                Mgmt                                                 Mgmt                                               Mgmt
                                Agent                                                Agent                                              Agent



                    NIC                  BMC                            NIC                   BMC                           NIC                   BMC


                   UALink System Node 1                                UALink System Node 2                                UALink System Node 3




                                                Figure 10: UALink Rack Scale system management interface
Summary
UALink is an open industry standard scale-up interconnect set to transform data center connec vity.
Tailored for ultra-high bandwidth and low-latency exchanges among homogeneous accelerated
compu ng devices, UALink is key to unlocking a new epoch of compute eﬃciency.

UALink is at the vanguard of innova on in the Ar ficial Intelligence and Machine Learning domains,
providing an open ecosystem path to a dedicated accelerator interconnect leveraging the ubiquitous
Ethernet ecosystem. By incorpora ng UALink Switches, accelerators with UALink capability, can expand
the scale-up domain, crea ng ultra-high bandwidth mul -node Accelerator Pods. UALink also enables a
simple so ware model by suppor ng load/store opera ons across an en re Pod of up to 1024
accelerators. The technologies developed by the UALink Consortium will have a lasting impact,
improving performance, ease of use, and the TCO of demanding AI and HPC applications of the future.

About the Ultra Accelerator Link Consor um

The Ultra Accelerator Link (UALink) Consortium, incorporated in October 2024, is an open industry
standard group dedicated to developing the UALink specifications, a high-speed, scale-up accelerator
interconnect technology that advances next-generation AI & HPC cluster performance. The consortium
is led by a board made up of stalwarts of the industry; Alibaba, AMD, Apple, Astera Labs, AWS, Cisco,
Google, HPE, Intel, Meta, Microsoft, and Synopsys. The Consortium develops technical specifications
that facilitate breakthrough performance for emerging AI usage models while supporting an open
ecosystem for data center accelerators.

For more information on the UALink Consortium, please visit www.UALinkConsortium.org

Interested to Contribute?
Join the UALink Consortium to participate in the technical working groups and influence the direction of
the UALink specification. Learn more about UALink membership here.

 Ultra Accelerator Link and UALink are trademarks of the UALink Consortium. All other trademarks are
                               the property of their respective owners.
