Concurrency-Aware Register Stacks for Efficient
GPU Function Calls
Ni Kang, Ahmad Alawneh, Mengchi Zhang*, Timothy G. Rogers
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
{kang222, aalawneh, zhan2308, timrogers}@purdue.edu

Abstract—Since the early days of computers, dividing a program into functions or subroutines has been a common way to
manage complexity. Functions make programs easier to read,
facilitate code reuse, and provide clean interfaces for separate
compilation. However, function calls incur runtime overhead.
We quantify the impact of this runtime overhead on GPUs and
demonstrate that the register spills/fills required to maintain
the function call application binary interface place significant
bandwidth and capacity pressure on shared resources.
To alleviate this overhead, we introduce Concurrency-Aware
Register Stacks (CARS), a hardware mechanism that re-purposes
segments of the GPU register file as a software-controlled
hardware stack. CARS exploits the regularity in function prologue/epilogues to rename registers pushed to the stack with
linear base + offset addressing, similar to the baseline GPU.
Informed by lightweight call graph analysis and dynamic function
behavior, CARS balances the space devoted to register stacks with
the concurrency required to hide latency in GPUs.
Without harming function-free programs, CARS improves the
performance and energy efficiency of 22 function-calling applications by 26% and 28%, respectively, outperforming idealized
GPUs with impractical resources.
Index Terms—GPU, Programmability, Register File.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ability to call functions is a cornerstone of any
general-purpose language. General-Purpose Graphics Processing Unit (GPGPU) programming frameworks [25], [41],
[43], [53] have supported device-side function calls (i.e.,
GPU functions calling GPU functions) since their inception.
Historically, GPU codebases have been relatively small, compiled as single objects, where all device-side function calls
are inlined [10], [11], [32], avoiding any runtime function
calling overhead. However, GPU applications and libraries
have grown significantly in size, complexity, and functionality.
Figure 1 plots the trend in benchmark suite/library source
lines of code (SLOC) and the number of device-side GPU
functions implemented in those applications over the past
15 years of CUDA development. As GPU development has
expanded, so have the codebases and their use of device
functions. For example, the latest NVIDIA-supported machine
learning libraries we study, Cutlass [39] and Rapids [9], [36]–
[38], contain 3129 and 6348 code files, with 3760 and 27469
device-side function implementations, respectively.
*Work conducted at Purdue University, currently at Meta.

𝟏𝟎𝟕

𝟏𝟎𝟕

𝟏𝟎𝟔

𝟏𝟎𝟔

𝟏𝟎𝟓

𝟏𝟎𝟓

𝟏𝟎𝟒

𝟏𝟎𝟒

𝟏𝟎𝟑

𝟏𝟎𝟑

𝟏𝟎𝟐

𝟏𝟎𝟐

𝟏𝟎
𝟎

𝟏𝟎
𝟎

Fig. 1: Number of device functions and source lines of code
(SLOC) for different GPU benchmark suites and libraries over
the past 15 years, y-axes are in log scale.

Continuing to scale an “always-inline” approach to compiling GPU programs is not sustainable. Although inlining can
improve performance by removing function calls and performing inter-procedural optimizations, it also has many downsides.
Function inlining decreases software flexibility and can result
in counter-intuitive performance cliffs that are difficult to predict statically [34], [49]. From a flexibility standpoint, inlining
burdens the binary construction toolchain (often informed by
the programmer) with determining which functions should be
inlined, requires expensive link-time optimization [19] (LTO)
to work with statically linked libraries or separate object compilation, is not possible with dynamically linked libraries, hinders the debuggability of the binary, and provides no runtime
flexibility to adjust thread occupancy since the registers for one
giant function must be loaded and persistent throughout the life
of a warp. From a performance perspective, inlining increases
compile/link time and memory consumption and can bloat the
application’s code size, increasing instruction cache pressure.
For example, compiling and linking our suite of function
calling workloads (detailed in Section V) with aggressive
inlining results in a 10.15× increase in binary construction
time and a 1.54× increase in binary size. Contemporary GPU
instructions are wide (16B each in Volta/Hopper) since they
encode explicit stalling information in each instruction to
avoid dynamic dependency checking [13]. This, combined
with larger codebases and aggressive inlining, has motivated

