ThreadFuser: A SIMT Analysis Framework for
MIMD Programs
Ahmad Alawneh, Ni Kang, Mahmoud Khairy*, Timothy G. Rogers
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
{aalawneh, kang222, abdallm, timrogers}@purdue.edu

I. I NTRODUCTION
Most parallel programs are written in a Multiple Instructions
Multiple Data (MIMD) fashion, primarily targeting CPUs [5],
[20], [21], [33], [39]. However, the slowing of Moore’s Law
and the energy-efficiency limitations of CPUs have prompted
a paradigm shift in architectural approaches, ushering in the
era of accelerators, with the GPU’s Single Instruction Multiple
Thread (SIMT) model gaining the most commercial traction.
Beyond their conventional role in graphics processing, SIMTbased architectures are used pervasively in High-Performance
Computing (HPC) and Machine Learning (ML). However,
they have yet to gain significant traction in other parallel
domains. Additional classes of software can benefit from execution on efficient SIMT hardware, creating a more diverse set
of applications for architects to explore SIMT designs outside
of traditional GPUs. From a software developer’s perspective,
porting code to a SIMT accelerator demands significant development time, and there is a risk of wasting effort if the code
is unsuitable for the hardware. As a result, most GPU codes

*Work conducted at Purdue University, currently at AMD Corporation

100

SIMT EFFICIENCY (Percent)

Abstract—The broad usage of accelerators, such as GPUs, faces
two important challenges. Developing code for a new accelerator
is expensive and unpredictable. Porting large parallel programs
from Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD) CPUs to Single
Instruction Multiple Thread (SIMT) GPUs involves significant
effort that may or may not result in improved performance versus
the CPU. This high activation energy to create new workloads introduces the second challenge: architects and systems researchers
lack a diverse SIMT codebase to study new designs.
To tackle these challenges, we introduce ThreadFuser, an
analysis framework that efficiently and accurately predicts the
performance of any pre-written MIMD program on SIMT
hardware. ThreadFuser conducts thorough control and data
flow analysis on dynamic CPU program traces, determining
the impact of lock-step execution on CPU binaries. ThreadFuser efficiently delivers accurate reports on a MIMD program’s divergence and synchronization characteristics. Moreover,
ThreadFuser seamlessly integrates with state-of-the-art GPU
simulators to conduct detailed analyses and produce fine-grained
performance measurements.
We evaluate ThreadFuser on a diverse set of 36 CPU workloads, demonstrating the potential and challenges of executing
MIMD code on a SIMT machine. We demonstrate ThreadFuser’s
potential to inform software development decisions and open new
areas to explore in data-parallel hardware design.
Index Terms—SIMT, GPU, Programmability, Simulation, Performance.

textsearch

90

usertag

80

Nbody

70
60
50

Rodinia
BFS

40
30 pigz

Parapoly
BFS
.

8 Thread Warp
16 Thread Warp
32 Thread Warp

20
10
0

MIMD CPU APPS

Fig. 1: Estimated SIMT Efficiency for 36 MIMD applications
(Section V-A) using ThreadFuser.

are ported from CPU codes with easy-to-identify regularity in
their control flow and access patterns. However, many parallel
applications miss acceleration opportunities because no effort
has been invested in moving them to a GPU. If developers had
access to a zero-effort performance estimation framework, the
risk of porting would be reduced, and more software could
take advantage of SIMT hardware. Similarly, architects face
limitations in analyzing and assessing the efficiency of new
SIMT hardware due to the limited variety of available software
for SIMT machines. Granting hardware designers the ability
to examine the impact of SIMT hardware on any CPU binary
can lead to more sophisticated SIMT accelerators that target
workloads beyond graphics, HPC, and ML.
To address both the developer’s lack of predictability and
the architect’s lack of software, we introduce ThreadFuser.
ThreadFuser is an analysis and trace-generation framework
designed to rapidly and precisely predict the performance
of any MIMD CPU program on SIMT hardware. By gathering dynamic traces from unaltered parallel CPU binaries,
ThreadFuser quickly analyses control flow and memory access
patterns. This process results in a comprehensive, per-function
breakdown of a parallel application’s SIMT efficiency, memory divergence level, and synchronization characteristics if it
were to be executed on SIMT hardware. This initial estimate is
cheap to produce (generated with no programmer effort in only
2-6× native CPU execution time) and can be applied to any
CPU binary, even closed source. For a more comprehensive
analysis, ThreadFuser also generates a trace file that integrates

