ThreadFuser: A SIMT A
MIMD P

Ahmad Alawneh, Ni Kang, Mahm

Elmore Family School of Electri
Purdue U
West Lafayet
{aalawneh, kang222, abdall

Abstract—The broad usage of accelerators, such as GPUs, faces
two important challenges. Developing code for a new accelerator
is expensive and unpredictable. Porting large parallel programs
from Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD) CPUs to Single
Instruction Multiple Thread (SIMT) GPUs involves significant
effort that may or may not result in improved performance versus
the CPU. This high activation energy to create new workloads introduces the second challenge: architects and systems researchers
lack a diverse SIMT codebase to study new designs.
To tackle these challenges, we introduce ThreadFuser, an
analysis framework that efficiently and accurately predicts the
performance of any pre-written MIMD program on SIMT
hardware. ThreadFuser conducts thorough control and data
flow analysis on dynamic CPU program traces, determining
the impact of lock-step execution on CPU binaries. ThreadFuser efficiently delivers accurate reports on a MIMD program’s divergence and synchronization characteristics. Moreover,
ThreadFuser seamlessly integrates with state-of-the-art GPU
simulators to conduct detailed analyses and produce fine-grained
performance measurements.
We evaluate ThreadFuser on a diverse set of 36 CPU workloads, demonstrating the potential and challenges of executing
MIMD code on a SIMT machine. We demonstrate ThreadFuser’s
potential to inform software development decisions and open new
areas to explore in data-parallel hardware design.
Index Terms—SIMT, GPU, Programmability, Simulation, Performance.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Most parallel programs are written in a Multiple Instructions
Multiple Data (MIMD) fashion, primarily targeting CPUs [5],
[20], [21], [33], [39]. However, the slowing of Moore’s Law
and the energy-efficiency limitations of CPUs have prompted
a paradigm shift in architectural approaches, ushering in the
era of accelerators, with the GPU’s Single Instruction Multiple
Thread (SIMT) model gaining the most commercial traction.
Beyond their conventional role in graphics processing, SIMTbased architectures are used pervasively in High-Performance
Computing (HPC) and Machine Learning (ML). However,
they have yet to gain significant traction in other parallel
domains. Additional classes of software can benefit from execution on efficient SIMT hardware, creating a more diverse set
of applications for architects to explore SIMT designs outside
of traditional GPUs. From a software developer’s perspective,
porting code to a SIMT accelerator demands significant development time, and there is a risk of wasting effort if the code
is unsuitable for the hardware. As a result, most GPU codes

*Work conducted at Purdue University, currently at AMD Corporation

