Elastic Translations: Fast virtual memory with
multiple translation sizes
Stratos Psomadakis∗

Chloe Alverti†

Vasileios Karakostas‡

Christos Katsakioris∗

psomas@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

xalverti@illinois.edu

vkarakos@di.uoa.gr

ckatsak@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

Dimitrios Siakavaras∗

Konstantinos Nikas∗

Georgios Goumas∗

Nectarios Koziris∗

jimsiak@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

knikas@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

goumas@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

nkoziris@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

∗ National Technical University of Athens

† University of Urbana-Champaign

‡ University of Athens

Athens, Greece

Champaign, Illinois, USA

Athens, Greece

Section II discusses them in detail. Earlier designs adopted
non-transparent interfaces [15, 17], which required large
pages to be explicitly requested by userspace. State-of-practice
and state-of-the-art eventually converged to transparent interfaces [12, 18] for large pages, tasking the OS memory
manager with selecting which page size to use and when.
The majority of these designs only support 2MiB pages
transparently. 1GiB large pages exacerbate the aforementioned
downsides of large pages, making their transparent support
challenging [8]. However, the effectiveness of 2MiB pages
diminishes as the memory footprint of applications keeps
growing [8]. Additionally, when memory is fragmented, even
2MiB become scarce thus hard to allocate [9, 11].
ARMv8-A and RISC-V provide architectural support for additional translation sizes1 , via OS-assisted TLB coalescing, by
adding a contiguous bit [21] in their page table entries. The OS
can set the contiguous bit on 16 contiguously mapped pages in
the first two levels of the page tables, effectively creating two
intermediate translation sizes, 64KiB and 32MiB respectively.
The contiguous bit acts as a marker for the page walker to
cache these table entries as a single TLB translation (Figure 1).
In this work we focus on ARMv8-A, but we also consider
the RISC-V support for OS-assisted TLB coalescing [22]. As
these architectures are making their way to the datacenter [23–
25], where the ever-growing workload footprints stress the
address translation (AT) hardware, we argue that a larger
arsenal of transparently-supported translation sizes, including
intermediate-sized translations, would allow system software
to better maneuver among the various trade-offs and address
the limitations exhibited by the traditional 2MiB / 1GiB large
page model.
To that end, system software needs to: i) provide mechanisms to transparently support the larger number of translation
sizes for both native and virtualized execution, and ii) devise
policies to judiciously select between those sizes. State-ofpractice and state-of-the-art have only partially addressed

Abstract—Large pages have been the de facto mitigation
technique to address the translation overheads of virtual memory,
with prior work mostly focusing on the large page sizes supported
by the x86 architecture, i.e., 2MiB and 1GiB. ARMv8-A and
RISC-V support additional intermediate translation sizes, i.e.,
64KiB and 32MiB, via OS-assisted TLB coalescing, but their
performance potential has largely fallen under the radar due to
the limited system software support. In this paper, we propose
Elastic Translations (ET), a holistic memory management solution, to fully explore and exploit the aforementioned translation
sizes for both native and virtualized execution. ET implements
mechanisms that make the OS memory manager coalescingaware, enabling the transparent and efficient use of intermediatesized translations. ET also employs policies to guide translation
size selection at runtime using lightweight HW-assisted TLB
miss sampling. We design and implement ET for ARMv8-A in
Linux and KVM. Our real-system evaluation of ET shows that
ET improves the performance of memory intensive workloads
by up to 39% in native execution and by 30% on average in
virtualized execution.
Index Terms—Operating Systems, Memory Management, Virtual Memory, Address Translation, TLB

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ever-growing memory footprints of modern workloads
have been steadily increasing the pressure on the virtual
memory subsystem [1]. Industry has responded by enabling
the memory management unit (MMU) and the OS to support
larger page sizes. Large pages store the virtual-to-physical
translations higher up the page table hierarchy, increasing the
Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) reach and shortening the
page walks triggered by these misses [2]. On the downside,
large pages often increase internal memory fragmentation and
fault latency [3–8] and quickly become scarce as physical
memory gets fragmented [3, 4, 9–11].
The x86 architecture supports two large page sizes, 2MiB
and 1GiB. Industry [12–19] and academia [3, 4, 6–9, 20]
have proposed a multitude of techniques, with different tradeoffs, to enable and enhance OS support for these large page
sizes. Table II provides an overview of these techniques and

1 We use translation size to refer to the granularity at which the TLB caches
translations.

This work was funded by the European Union under the Horizon Europe
grant 101092850 (project AERO).

1

