Elastic Translations: Fa
multiple trans
Stratos Psomadakis∗

Chloe Alverti†

psomas@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

xalverti@illinois.edu

Dimitrios Siakavaras∗

Konstantinos Nikas∗

jimsiak@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

knikas@cslab.ece.ntua.gr

∗ National Technical University of Athens

Athens, Greece

† University

Champa

Abstract—Large pages have been the de facto mitigation
technique to address the translation overheads of virtual memory,
with prior work mostly focusing on the large page sizes supported
by the x86 architecture, i.e., 2MiB and 1GiB. ARMv8-A and
RISC-V support additional intermediate translation sizes, i.e.,
64KiB and 32MiB, via OS-assisted TLB coalescing, but their
performance potential has largely fallen under the radar due to
the limited system software support. In this paper, we propose
Elastic Translations (ET), a holistic memory management solution, to fully explore and exploit the aforementioned translation
sizes for both native and virtualized execution. ET implements
mechanisms that make the OS memory manager coalescingaware, enabling the transparent and efficient use of intermediatesized translations. ET also employs policies to guide translation
size selection at runtime using lightweight HW-assisted TLB
miss sampling. We design and implement ET for ARMv8-A in
Linux and KVM. Our real-system evaluation of ET shows that
ET improves the performance of memory intensive workloads
by up to 39% in native execution and by 30% on average in
virtualized execution.
Index Terms—Operating Systems, Memory Management, Virtual Memory, Address Translation, TLB

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ever-growing memory footprints of modern workloads
have been steadily increasing the pressure on the virtual
memory subsystem [1]. Industry has responded by enabling
the memory management unit (MMU) and the OS to support
larger page sizes. Large pages store the virtual-to-physical
translations higher up the page table hierarchy, increasing the
Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) reach and shortening the
page walks triggered by these misses [2]. On the downside,
large pages often increase internal memory fragmentation and
fault latency [3–8] and quickly become scarce as physical
memory gets fragmented [3, 4, 9–11].
The x86 architecture supports two large page sizes, 2MiB
and 1GiB. Industry [12–19] and academia [3, 4, 6–9, 20]
have proposed a multitude of techniques, with different tradeoffs, to enable and enhance OS support for these large page
sizes. Table II provides an overview of these techniques and
This work was funded by the European Union under the Horizon Europe
grant 101092850 (project AERO).

1

