BatchZK: A Fully Pipelined GPU-Accelerated System
for Batch Generation of Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Tao Lu†,§ , Yuxun Chen† , Zonghui Wang†,∗ , Xiaohang Wang† , Wenzhi Chen†,∗ , Jiaheng Zhang§
† Zhejiang University, China,

{lutao2020, chenyuxunzju, zhwang, xiaohangwang, chenwz}@zju.edu.cn
§ National University of Singapore, Singapore,
jhzhang@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

could claim its outputs are indeed calculated from a welltrained model and then employ ZKP to prove the validity of
this claim, while keeping the model’s parameters confidential. In recent years, ZKP has received much attention from
academia [29, 38, 49, 59, 61] and industry [11, 17, 42, 48],
leading to its widespread adoption in private-critical applications such as blockchain [31, 46, 60], verifiable machine
learning [5, 13, 35], and verifiable program analysis [10, 12].
With the growing deployment of ZKP, the demand for generating zero-knowledge proofs has increased dramatically. A
report from Protocol Labs [32] states that the demand is expected to reach a staggering nearly 90 billion zero-knowledge
proofs from the time ZKPs start to be applied in real-world
applications to 2030. Moreover, generating zero-knowledge
proofs is a compute-intensive task. For example, ZENO [13],
a start-of-the-art ZKP scheme for verifiable neural networks,
requires more than 40 seconds to generate a single proof for
the prediction of the VGG-16 model [52] with a CIFAR-10 image [8] as input. Therefore, improving the efficiency of proof
generation has become one of the most important topics in
expanding the deployment of ZKP in practical applications.
On the one hand, at the theoretical level, a series of recent efficient ZKP protocols [6, 20, 49, 59, 61, 63] have been
proposed. These protocols bypass the expensive operations
used in previous ZKP protocols [3, 15, 22], such as numbertheoretic transform (NTT) and multi-scaler multiplication
(MSM). Instead, they utilize cheaper modules to minimize
the overhead in proof generation. On the other hand, at
the practical level, GPU is a powerful tool to further improve computational efficiency through tens of thousands
of execution cores operating in parallel. Considerable efforts [7, 29, 36, 38] have been directed toward developing
GPU-accelerated systems for proof generation.
However, these previous GPU-accelerated systems [7, 29,
36, 38] only explored how to efficiently generate a single
proof, with the goal of reducing proof generation latency.
These systems spend over-abundant GPU resources on individual proof generation, failing to optimize the overall
throughput of batch generation. Improving throughput is
critical in the industry as it means more proofs to be generated per unit of time, resulting in greater economic benefits. In addition, these systems only cover ZKP protocols
[3, 15, 22] that rely on expensive computational modules

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic primitive
that enables one party to prove the validity of a statement to
other parties without disclosing any secret information. With
its widespread adoption in applications such as blockchain
and verifiable machine learning, the demand for generating zero-knowledge proofs has increased dramatically. In
recent years, considerable efforts have been directed toward
developing GPU-accelerated systems for proof generation.
However, these previous systems only explored efficiently
generating a single proof by reducing latency rather than
batch generation to provide high throughput.
We propose a fully pipelined GPU-accelerated system for
batch generation of zero-knowledge proofs. Our system has
three features to improve throughput. First, we design a
pipelined approach that enables each GPU thread to continuously execute its designated proof generation task without
being idle. Second, our system supports recent efficient ZKP
protocols with their computational modules: sum-check protocol, Merkle tree, and linear-time encoder. We customize
these modules to fit our pipelined execution. Third, we adopt
a dynamic loading method for the data required for proof
generation, reducing the required device memory. Moreover,
multi-stream technology enables the overlap of data transfers and GPU computations, reducing overhead caused by
data exchanges between host and device memory.
We implement our system and evaluate it on various GPU
cards. The results show that our system achieves more than
259.5× higher throughput compared to state-of-the-art GPUaccelerated systems. Moreover, we deploy our system in the
verifiable machine learning application, where our system
generates 9.52 proofs per second, successfully achieving subsecond proof generation for the first time in this field.

1

Introduction

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) [19] is a cryptographic primitive that enables one party to prove the validity of a statement to other parties without disclosing any secret information. For example, a machine-learning service provider
§ The first author conducted this work as a visiting scholar at NUS.
∗ Corresponding authers.
1

