UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof with
Unified Hardware and Flexible Kernel Mapping
Cheng Wang∗

Mingyu Gao

wangcheng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core
Technology
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core
Technology
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Abstract

ACM Reference Format:
Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao. 2025. UniZK: Accelerating ZeroKnowledge Proof with Unified Hardware and Flexible Kernel Mapping. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3669940.3707228

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) is an important cryptographic
tool that sees wide applications in real-world scenarios where
privacy must be protected, including privacy-preserving
blockchains and zero-knowledge machine learning. Existing
ZKP acceleration approaches using GPUs, FPGAs, and ASICs
focus only on classic protocols that rely on expensive elliptic
curve arithmetics. Emerging ZKP protocols based on hash
functions can greatly reduce the algorithmic complexity, but
they also introduce much more diverse computation kernels
that cannot be efficiently handled by a single accelerator chip
if dedicated units for each kernel are used. Our approach
is to leverage a unified hardware architecture that is able
to efficiently support the common primitives in ZKP, and
then use smart mapping strategies to flexibly map various
kernels to such hardware while ensuring high resource utilization. We design UniZK as such a ZKP accelerator, with a
systolic-array-based hardware architecture enhanced with
extra local links and a new vector processing mode. We propose novel mapping strategies to support diverse kernels
including number theoretic transforms, hash functions, and
general polynomial computations. UniZK provides 97× and
46× speedups on average compared to the CPU and GPU implementations of the same protocols, and is also 840× faster
than previous ZKP accelerators using different protocols.

1

Introduction

Given a function 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑤) and a public input 𝑥, zero-knowledge
proof (ZKP) protocols enable a prover to convince a verifier that she possesses a secret input 𝑤 (a.k.a., witness) that
satisfies 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑤) = 0, without revealing any information
about the value of 𝑤. The capability of ZKP to validate statements without revealing any potentially sensitive information is particularly important in a variety of fields, including blockchains, financial transactions, authentication protocols, electronic voting systems, and zero-knowledge machine
learning (ZKML). Consequently, ZKP has recently become
a powerful cryptographic tool with numerous applications
when it is critical to protect privacy.
The protocol of ZKP involves two parties, the prover who
generates a proof, and the verifier who verifies the proof.
Because one generated proof may be potentially verified by
many individual verifiers, most ZKP protocols are designed
to have very fast and low-cost verification processes, but the
proof generation is usually complicated and takes substantial time when proving real-world statements. For example,
generating a consensus proof of the finalized header for the
Ethereum blockchain using an AWS r6a.8xlarge machine
takes about 300 seconds [18]. This makes proof generation
an interesting target for specialized hardware and software
acceleration in the computer architecture and system community [4, 19, 40, 41, 43, 56, 68, 69, 72], with various hardware
choices ranging from GPUs, FPGAs, to ASICs.
Nevertheless, almost all existing ZKP acceleration systems
focus on the classic protocols based on elliptic curves [27],
which only contain two computation kernels in the proof
generation process. Modern ZKP protocols [16, 17, 51, 62,

CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Hardware accelerators; •
Theory of computation → Cryptographic protocols.
Keywords: domain-specific acceleration, zero-knowledge
proof, mapping
∗ Work done during the internship at the Institute for Interdisciplinary

Information Core Technology, Xi’an.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707228

1101

