UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof with
Unified Hardware and Flexible Kernel Mapping
Cheng Wang∗

Mingyu Gao

wangcheng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core
Technology
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core
Technology
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Abstract

ACM Reference Format:
Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao. 2025. UniZK: Accelerating ZeroKnowledge Proof with Unified Hardware and Flexible Kernel Mapping. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3669940.3707228

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) is an important cryptographic
tool that sees wide applications in real-world scenarios where
privacy must be protected, including privacy-preserving
blockchains and zero-knowledge machine learning. Existing
ZKP acceleration approaches using GPUs, FPGAs, and ASICs
focus only on classic protocols that rely on expensive elliptic
curve arithmetics. Emerging ZKP protocols based on hash
functions can greatly reduce the algorithmic complexity, but
they also introduce much more diverse computation kernels
that cannot be efficiently handled by a single accelerator chip
if dedicated units for each kernel are used. Our approach
is to leverage a unified hardware architecture that is able
to efficiently support the common primitives in ZKP, and
then use smart mapping strategies to flexibly map various
kernels to such hardware while ensuring high resource utilization. We design UniZK as such a ZKP accelerator, with a
systolic-array-based hardware architecture enhanced with
extra local links and a new vector processing mode. We propose novel mapping strategies to support diverse kernels
including number theoretic transforms, hash functions, and
general polynomial computations. UniZK provides 97× and
46× speedups on average compared to the CPU and GPU implementations of the same protocols, and is also 840× faster
than previous ZKP accelerators using different protocols.

1

Introduction

Given a function 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑤) and a public input 𝑥, zero-knowledge
proof (ZKP) protocols enable a prover to convince a verifier that she possesses a secret input 𝑤 (a.k.a., witness) that
satisfies 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑤) = 0, without revealing any information
about the value of 𝑤. The capability of ZKP to validate statements without revealing any potentially sensitive information is particularly important in a variety of fields, including blockchains, financial transactions, authentication protocols, electronic voting systems, and zero-knowledge machine
learning (ZKML). Consequently, ZKP has recently become
a powerful cryptographic tool with numerous applications
when it is critical to protect privacy.
The protocol of ZKP involves two parties, the prover who
generates a proof, and the verifier who verifies the proof.
Because one generated proof may be potentially verified by
many individual verifiers, most ZKP protocols are designed
to have very fast and low-cost verification processes, but the
proof generation is usually complicated and takes substantial time when proving real-world statements. For example,
generating a consensus proof of the finalized header for the
Ethereum blockchain using an AWS r6a.8xlarge machine
takes about 300 seconds [18]. This makes proof generation
an interesting target for specialized hardware and software
acceleration in the computer architecture and system community [4, 19, 40, 41, 43, 56, 68, 69, 72], with various hardware
choices ranging from GPUs, FPGAs, to ASICs.
Nevertheless, almost all existing ZKP acceleration systems
focus on the classic protocols based on elliptic curves [27],
which only contain two computation kernels in the proof
generation process. Modern ZKP protocols [16, 17, 51, 62,

CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Hardware accelerators; •
Theory of computation → Cryptographic protocols.
Keywords: domain-specific acceleration, zero-knowledge
proof, mapping
∗ Work done during the internship at the Institute for Interdisciplinary

Information Core Technology, Xi’an.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707228

1101

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

70, 71] now start to use hash functions instead of ellipticcurve operations, and offer many highly desired features
including elimination of trusted setup, removal of expensive
elliptic curve cryptography, as well as flexible tradeoff between proving time, verification time, and proof size. These
new protocols are also being increasingly widely adopted in
real-world applications like blockchains [15, 49, 50, 57] and
ZKML [66]. However, these hash-based protocols have much
more diverse computation kernels, not only including the
conventional ones like number theoretic transforms (NTTs)
and Merkle trees, but also incorporating emerging hash functions like Poseidon [26] as well as miscellaneous polynomial
operations such as additions, multiplications, and partial
products on their quotient polynomials. Designing separate
and dedicated hardware units for each kernel and putting
them on one chip would result in a large chip area and low
resource utilization. If new kernels that cannot be supported
by the current accelerator are introduced, we have to fall
back to the host CPU with back-and-forth data transfers.
In this paper, we aim to design a general ZKP accelerator
that is able to accelerate as many kernels as possible involved
in modern hash-based protocols such as Plonky2 [51] and
Starky [52]. Our key philosophy is to leverage a unified hardware architecture not overly customized to any specific kernel, but still able to efficiently support the common primitives
of ZKP cryptography like modular arithmetic operations and
typical data access patterns. Then, we propose novel kernel
mapping strategies to flexibly map various computation kernels to such hardware, while ensuring high utilization of
hardware resources. Actually, the widely successful neural
network accelerators have followed exactly the same paradigm, using relatively general architectures to support fast
evolving operators such as convolution, matrix multiplication, and self-attention [10, 23, 32–34, 39].
More specifically, we propose an accelerator named UniZK
following the above philosophy. Our hardware architecture
contains a global SRAM buffer and multiple tiles of processing element (PE) arrays, where each PE contains several
modular add/multiply units and a register file. The inter-PE
connection within each array follows the efficient systolic
manner [33, 37], but is slightly enhanced with the addition
of a few additional local links and the support of a vector
processing mode. Our kernel mapping strategies can successfully map a diverse set of kernels. These include (1) variablelength NTTs with several variants like coset and bit-reverse
orders, (2) hash functions with irregular computation patterns, e.g., Poseidon, (3) Merkle tree construction, and (4)
polynomial additions, multiplications, and various other operations. Most of these kernels exhibit high utilization on
both on-chip logic and off-chip memory bandwidth.
When evaluated against highly optimized CPU and GPU
baselines using the Plonky2 protocol, UniZK is 97× and 46×
faster on average, and up to 147× and 104×, respectively.

The individual kernels of NTT, hash function, and polynomial computation see speedups ranging from 92× to 191×.
When using the more efficient protocol of Starky-enhanced
Plonky2, UniZK is up to 267× faster than the CPU. Compared
to the previous accelerator PipeZK [72] for classic ellipticcurve-based protocols, UniZK achieves an 840× speedup
with both algorithmic and architectural advantages.

2

Background

In this section, we first review the recent development of
zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) techniques (Section 2.1), and
introduce the specific protocols, Plonky2 and Starky, as the
representatives for our accelerator design (Section 2.2). We
then break down their execution time of proof generation,
to motivate our architectural innovations (Section 2.3).
2.1 Zero-Knowledge Proof Protocols
ZKP is a fundamental primitive in modern cryptography and
has evolved rapidly in recent years. Early implementations of
ZKP were mainly based on elliptic curve (EC) cryptography.
While they provide strong security, these early ZKP protocols require complex mathematical operations over large
integer fields, resulting in significant computational overheads. For example, Groth16 [27] generates succinct proofs
that are within hundreds of bytes and can be verified quickly.
However, proof generation in Groth16 involves number theoretic transforms and EC-based multi-scalar multiplications
on integers as wide as 256 to 768 bits. Both the wide integer
arithmetic and the EC-based operations are highly expensive on modern hardware, limiting the performance of these
protocols in many real-world applications.
Recent advancements have introduced hash-based ZKP
protocols [16, 17, 51, 62, 70, 71] that operate over smaller
integer fields. Hash functions are faster and consume fewer
resources, making them a more cost-efficient alternative to
EC operations. These changes greatly reduce the computational cost of proof generation. But on the other hand, these
protocols may result in somewhat larger proof sizes and
higher verification cost compared to EC-based ones.
While various modern ZKP protocols exhibit different
tradeoffs among proof size, proof generation time, and verification time, usually the proof generation phase is always
the most time-consuming part and thus the target for most
performance optimizations. Proof generation in modern protocols is typically constructed in three generic steps [8, 11]:
Arithmetization, Polynomial Interactive Oracle Proof (PIOP),
and Polynomial Commitment Scheme (PCS). First, the statement to be proved is converted into an arithmetic circuit
(Arithmetization). Then, the prover uses its own secret witness as well as some randomness from the verifier to build a
set of polynomial equations (PIOP). Finally, the prover sends
the cryptographic commitment of these polynomials to the
verifier (PCS). The interactive parts in the above steps, such

1102

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

𝑤 𝑎,2 = 𝑥 2 and 𝑤𝑏,2 = 𝑥 3 , which enforces 𝑥 2 ∗𝑥 3 = 𝑞𝑂,2 ·𝑤𝑐,2 =
𝑥 5 , i.e., the bottom right gate in the circuit.
To ensure a correct 𝑊 , the elements in the same color in
𝑊 must have the same value, meaning that the output of one
gate is connected to the input of another gate. The protocol
thus constructs an index matrix 𝑖𝑑, and a permutation matrix
𝜎 with the values in the same color in 𝑖𝑑 being permuted.
With the random numbers 𝛽 and 𝛾 from the verifier, (𝑊 , 𝑖𝑑)
and (𝑊 , 𝜎) are used to form 𝑓 and 𝑔, respectively, where
they should be equal as required by the copy constraints in
Figure 1 left bottom. This is because the permuted values in
𝑖𝑑 and 𝜎 correspond to the same values in 𝑊 .
It is worth noting that, in the actual implementation, the
above computations on scalar values are transformed by
interpolating the scalars into polynomials and then computing on the polynomials, which improves parallelization and
efficiency. The polynomial computations involve not only
element-wise additions and multiplications, but also a small
number of number theoretic transforms (NTTs) and their
variant coset-NTTs [6] for polynomial multiplications, as
well as some accumulations on partial products.
FRI for PCS. FRI is a protocol for verifying the degree of
a given polynomial is within a certain bound. The protocol
has three main steps as illustrated in Figure 1 right.
Step ① applies the natural-input-natural-output inverse
NTTs (iNTTNN ) on the polynomials to convert the value representation into the coefficient representation. For security
reasons, in step ②, these polynomials must be evaluated by
low degree extension (LDE), where the coefficient vectors
are expanded to 𝑘 times of their original length through zero
padding. Here 𝑘 is referred to as the blowup factor, which
is at least 8 in Plonky2. Then, the natural-input-bit-reverseoutput NTTs (NTTNR ) are performed in the LDE domain.
Step ③ is the construction of the Merkle tree, starting
from the leaf nodes and moving upwards. The input data to
each leaf node are formed by taking values from the same
position of all the polynomials and concatenating them. A
hash function is applied on them to determine the leaf node
value. Then, the Merkle tree is built as a binary tree where
the parent node value is the hash result of the concatenated
value of the two children. In Plonky2, the Poseidon hash
function [26] is used. Finally, the prover sends the root of the
Merkle tree as a commitment to the verifier. The verifier may
query a random leaf node, for which the prover provides to
the verifier the corresponding authentication path from this
leaf to the root for verification.
Starky. Starky [52] adopts different Arithmetization and
PIOP components from Plonky2. It still uses FRI as its PCS,
except that the blowup factor 𝑘 is set to a different value of
2. In Starky, the computation is represented by an Algebraic
Execution Trace (AET), which is essentially a table with each
entry describing the state at a specific time step, and adjacent
entries adhering to the transition constraints. The protocol
also supports input and output constraints to enforce certain

as the randomness sent from the verifier to the prover, could
be all eliminated by the Fiat-Shamir transform [20], thus
constructing a non-interactive protocol.
Plonky2 [51] is one of the most popular implementations
of hash-based ZKPs. Its three components are Plonkish,
Plonk [22], and Fast Reed-Solomon IOP of Proximity (FRI) [5],
which together provide numerous beneficial features, including not requiring a trusted setup, high performance due to
the use of small algebraic fields and not relying on expensive elliptic curves, as well as support for proof aggregation
by recursive proving [7] to reduce storage and communication overheads. Plonky2 can be further enhanced with
another protocol called Starky [52]. Starky is much less
expensive than Plonky2, but it has large proof sizes (several MBs) and does not support zero knowledge. We can
use Starky to prove non-recursive statements and then use
Plonky2 to compress and aggregate the Starky proofs. This
combination yields a quite efficient ZKP scheme. Plonky2
is now widely used in many application domains such as
blockchains [15, 49, 50, 57], electronic voting [13], zeroknowledge virtual machines [38], and zero-knowledge machine learning [66]. Consequently, we use it as a representative to design our accelerator.
2.2 Example Protocols: Plonky2 and Starky
Now we describe the algorithm details of Plonky2 and Starky.
Figure 1 illustrates the proof generation flow of Plonky2 [51],
where a prover aims to prove that she knows a set of private
values (𝑥 0, 𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, 𝑥 3 ) that satisfy (𝑥 0 +𝑥 1 ) ∗ (𝑥 2 ∗𝑥 3 ) = 99. We
first follow this example to explain the key steps of Plonky2.
We omit the Arithmetization part that converts a statement
into an arithmetic circuit, because it does not depend on
the prover’s input secret data, and thus can be done fully
offline. At the end, we discuss Starky, focusing on the key
differences compared to Plonky2. We mainly describe the
high-level algorithm flow of the protocols here, and defer
the details of their computation kernels to Section 5.
Plonk for PIOP. The process of converting an arithmetic
circuit to a set of polynomial equations involves two types
of constraints: gate constraints and copy constraints. Gate
constraints represent rules for computing arithmetic gates
in the circuit, while copy constraints ensure that gates in the
circuit are properly connected through wires. As Figure 1
left shows, the arithmetic circuit of the statement (𝑥 0 + 𝑥 1 ) ∗
(𝑥 2 ∗ 𝑥 3 ) = 99 is represented by the matrix 𝑄. Each of its first
three rows represents a gate in the circuit, and the fourth row
explicitly indicates that the output is 99. The matrix 𝑊 keeps
the secret witness data filled by the prover, where each row is
the input and output values of each gate. Each column of 𝑄 is
the coefficients for linear, quadratic, or constant constraints
with respect to the variables in𝑊 .𝑊 and 𝑄 should satisfy the
gate constraints at the bottom when combined using elementwise multiplications (“·”). For example, for gate 𝑖 = 2, only
the quadratic coefficient 𝑞𝑀,2 is effectual for the product of

1103

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

Plonk

FRI
0
1
2
3

0
1
0
0

0
1
0
0

1 0
0 0
1 0
0 99

0
1
2
3

0
1
2
3

4 8
5 9
6 10
7 11

1
1
1
1

0
1
2
3

0

0
1
2
3

9 10 11
1 5 0
2 6 4
3 7 8

PolyValue 0
PolyValue 1
PolyValue 2
PolyValue 3
①

0

PolyCoeff 0
PolyCoeff 1
PolyCoeff 2
PolyCoeff 3

Padding
Padding
Padding
Padding
②

③

Gate Constraints
Copy Constraints
Leaf

Leaf

Leaf

Leaf

Leaf

Query Leaf

Leaf

Leaf

Leaf

Authentication Path

Figure 1. Steps of Plonk and FRI during proof generation in Plonky2, with an example statement of (𝑥 0 + 𝑥 1 ) ∗ (𝑥 2 ∗ 𝑥 3 ) = 99.
Table 1. Plonky2 proof generation time breakdown.
0

1

1

2

3

1

1

2

3

5
Factorial
Fibonacci
ECDSA
SHA-256
Image Crop
MVM

Transition
Constraints
Input and Output
Constraints

Time
(s)

Polynomial

NTT

Merkle
Tree

Other
Hash

Layout
Transform

580
34
101
673
333
512

13.4%
12.1%
24.9%
11.5%
11.5%
13.7%

21.8%
20.0%
15.7%
19.0%
17.1%
15.9%

62.4%
65.8%
57.2%
67.0%
68.8%
65.7%

0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.0%
0.3%
0.1%

2.4%
2.0%
2.0%
2.5%
2.3%
4.6%

time breakdown; our final evaluation uses multi-threaded
baselines. The measured time includes Plonk and FRI but excludes Arithmetization. Table 1 shows the results. The other
hash operations are needed in Fiat-Shamir transforms and
proof-of-work computations outside the Merkle tree phase.
They also use the same Poseidon hash function.
From the breakdown results we can see that, usually the
Merkle tree construction accounts for the majority (about
60%) of the execution time. This is mainly due to the large
number of Poseidon hash computations involved. The NTT
and various polynomial operations rank the second and third
in terms of computation time, together contributing to about
35% of the overall time. The remaining hash operations and
the data layout transformations exhibit small portions.

Figure 2. An example AET for proving the 5th Fibonacci
sequence number is 5. The constraints should be equal to 0.
input and output values. Figure 2 shows an example AET for
proving the Fibonacci sequence.
Despite the significant differences between Plonky2 and
Starky in Arithmetization and PIOP, the underlying computational operations are highly similar, both involving elementwise polynomial computations, polynomial multiplications,
etc. In addition, their FRI steps follow the same procedure
with only different parameters. Thus, it is feasible to design
a single accelerator to support both protocols.
2.3 Performance Breakdown Analysis
As we can see from Section 2.2, the proof generation processes in Plonky2 and Starky contain many intensive computations including polynomial operations during Plonk,
NTTs, and Merkle tree construction during FRI, as well as
various data layout transformations such as transpose. To
further understand the main time consumers in Plonky2,
we run several proof generation workloads with a singlethreaded CPU implementation (see Section 6 for workload
and hardware details). We use a single thread to simplify

3

Design Philosophy

From the performance analysis in Section 2.3 we see that,
modern ZKP protocols usually contain multiple diverse kernels that each contributes a non-negligible portion to the
overall execution time. In particular, the polynomial operations, though shown as a single category in Table 1, actually include multiple diverse kernels. This observation
puts several new challenges to the hardware acceleration.
First, existing ZKP accelerators targeting EC-based ZKPs,

1104

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

e.g., PipeZK [72], extracted two dominant kernels from the
protocol, and designed dedicated hardware modules for them
separately. When it comes to our case like Plonky2, from
Table 1 we can quickly see that only capturing the top-2 kernels (e.g., Merkle tree and NTT) will at most give us less than
7× speedup according to Amdahl’s law. Second, because the
time portions of different kernels could vary significantly
across different proof generation workloads (e.g., 11% to 25%
for polynomial operations), having multiple dedicated modules with rigid static resource provisioning would likely face
the issue of unbalanced throughput when running different
workloads. One kernel may run too long due to insufficient
resources, while other kernels finish quickly and leave their
modules idle. Third, some of the kernels use specific cryptographic primitives, e.g., Poseidon hash, which requires highly
specialized dedicated units that may easily become out-dated
if the next version switches to another hash choice. Finally,
being able to accelerate all the kernels can also reduce data
movement. If some kernels cannot run on the accelerator
and are left to the host CPU, the intermediate data must be
transferred to the CPU and then back over the slow PCIe
connections, dwarfing the performance gains.
As a result, our goal is to design a general ZKP accelerator
that is able to accelerate as many kernels as possible involved
in modern ZKP protocols such as Plonky2 and Starky, by
leveraging a unified hardware architecture that can flexibly map diverse kernels. Our design philosophy is to keep
the hardware architecture simple and general (Section 4), not
overly customized to any specific kernels, while still offering
sufficient efficiency by capturing the common characteristics
of ZKP algorithms, such as the modular arithmetic computations and the common data access patterns and layout
transformations. On the other hand, we rely on novel kernel
mapping strategies (Section 5), in order to realize the diverse
kernels efficiently on the general hardware and ensure high
computational utilization. This approach is akin to the philosophy of modern neural network accelerators that use
the same hardware for various tensor operations like matrix
multiplication, convolution, and self-attention [10, 21, 23, 32–
34, 39, 48, 63]. In the next sections, we respectively introduce
the hardware architecture and the kernel mapping strategies.

Transpose Buffer
Controller

Scratchpad
VSA

VSA

VSA

VSA

Twiddle Factor Generator

(a) Overall architecture.

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

Transpose Buffer

Scratchpad

4

DRAM

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

Constant Buffer
Register File
Mod Mul

Vector Unit

Mod Add/Sub
Mod Add/Sub

PE

(b) Vector-systolic array (VSA) and processing element (PE).

Figure 3. Hardware architecture of UniZK.

latencies and maximizing on-chip data reuse. We also incorporate a global transpose buffer to perform data transpose operations on-chip, implicitly when fetching data from
memory [59, 72]. Finally, a twiddle factor generator is implemented on-chip, which consists of several modular multipliers and a set of buffers to support on-the-fly twiddle factor
generation during NTT computations [36, 65].
The structures of the VSA and the PE are further shown
in Figure 3b. The VSA resembles a classic systolic array [37]
widely used in neural network accelerators [10, 31–33, 46].
The input and output data are transferred to and from the
VSA from its boundaries, and the data communication within
the VSA is restricted to neighbor PEs. UniZK instantiates
each VSA with 12 × 12 PEs. This size is decided to match
the ZKP kernels, specifically the Poseidon hash, as explained
in Section 5.2. Each PE is connected to its right and bottom neighbors in the standard systolic way, plus several
additional links described shortly. Standard matrix multiplications can thus be mapped to the VSA. For example, a
constant matrix can be loaded to the array and multiplied
with the input matrix, in a weight stationary manner [25, 58].
Each PE in the VSA contains a 64-bit modular multiplier,
two 64-bit modular adders/subtractors, and a register file of
64 × 64 bits. All operations in UniZK are performed on 64bit data elements in the Goldilocks field [51]. The simplified
Goldilocks field operations reduce the complexity of the hardware modular adders and modular multipliers. In Plonky2,
there are also a small number of computations based on the

Hardware Architecture

Figure 3a illustrates the overall architecture of UniZK. The
central compute engine is the multiple homogeneous vectorsystolic arrays [44] (VSAs), each of which is an array of
processing elements (PEs) interconnected with customized
networks. Recall that UniZK aims to provide a unified architecture for diverse ZKP kernels. Therefore the VSAs are
homogeneous and not specialized to any kernels. In addition, UniZK utilizes a double-buffered scratchpad between
the VSAs and the off-chip DRAM, hiding memory access

1105

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

extension field [12] for soundness [64]. Each extension field
element consists of 𝐷 elements from the base Goldilocks field,
and thus requires 64𝐷 bits of storage. Usually a quadratic
extension with 𝐷 = 2 is employed. Nevertheless, the arithmetic operations can still execute on the base field, treating
each 64 bits as a limb, albeit with more steps.
To efficiently support the diverse kernels in modern ZKP
protocols, UniZK further enhances the VSA with an additional vector mode and a few additional links between PEs. In
the vector mode, each column of the VSA can be considered
as an individual vector unit. The entire chip thus contains
many independent vector units for parallel data processing.
The vector mode is particularly suitable for the large amount
of polynomial operations in ZKP. Interestingly, the systolic
links between neighbor PEs still provide some data reuse,
such as directly forwarding a vector from one unit to another,
and accumulating vector elements to a scalar. We will show
concrete examples in Section 5 about how to make use of
these links to efficiently map various ZKP kernels.
Nevertheless, for more complex and irregular kernels such
as the Poseidon hash, the rigid systolic links are insufficient.
Hence we add a limited amount of new links to the VSA.
Specifically, we add reverse links that go bottom up in certain
columns in the array, shown as the red arrows in Figure 3b.
Their specific usage will be explained in Section 5. These new
links still connect only neighbor PEs and avoid long global
wires, in order to minimize the impact on the placement and
routing complexity and thus the overall area cost.

5

coefficients using an inverse NTT (iNTT), which follows the
same computation pattern but uses different twiddle factors.
Nevertheless, the NTT operations in our ZKP protocols
pose several new challenges. First, the NTT size, i.e., the
polynomial length, depends on the size of the arithmetic
circuit to prove. Also, the LDE step in FRI would change
the polynomial length. Thus we must efficiently support
variable-length NTTs. Second, instead of using specialized
datapaths in previous NTT designs, we need to map the
irregular NTT dataflow onto our general hardware architecture. This is challenging because we need to realize the
variable-strided butterfly operations only with the limited
neighbor-connected links in our PE array. Third, NTTs could
happen at various phases during the protocol, in which the
input and output polynomials could have varying layouts
in memory, such as polynomial-major (i.e., all elements in a
polynomial are stored continuously) and index-major (i.e.,
the elements in the same position of all polynomials are
stored continuously). Our NTT mapping should support
efficient memory accesses to both layouts. Fourth, several
variants of NTTs, such as coset-(i)NTTs and (i)NTTs with
both natural and bit-reverse data orders (NN, NR, etc.), are
needed, and should be handled seamlessly in the hardware.
Mapping variable-length NTTs to unified hardware.
To efficiently support variable-length NTTs with fixed hardware, we adopt the multi-dimensional NTT decomposition
approach in SAM [65], which decomposes an NTT kernel of
variable size 𝑁 into multiple smaller NTTs of fixed size 𝑛 that
matches the hardware size. The decomposed fixed-length
small NTTs can then fully utilize the hardware. Element-wise
twiddle factor multiplications are also needed between the
groups of small NTTs when switching between the decomposed dimensions. We next describe how to map these two
sub-kernels, i.e., size-𝑛 NTTs and inter-dimension twiddle
multiplications, onto our VSA structure.
First, for the small fixed-size NTTs, we follow the MDC
(multi-path delay commutator) pipelined structure [24]. Figure 4a shows how to map a DIF NTT to a linear sequence
of PEs using the MDC pipeline. Each pipeline stage has a
throughput of 2 elements per cycle. We use the modular
multiplier/adder/subtractor in one PE to implement a stage.
The corresponding twiddle factors are stored in the register
file. Each stage also needs to shuffle the elements to realize
the desired strides for butterfly operations. For example, in
the first stage, we pair 0 and 4, 1 and 5, . . . , for a stride of 4.
Their outputs are buffered, and element 0 needs to wait for
element 2 for the next stage. We use the register file of each
PE to realize such data buffering. Specifically, the results of
0, 1 in the first stage are buffered locally, and sent to the
next stage along with the results of 2, 3 generated later. The
required register capacity is bound by the fixed NTT size
𝑛. Although such data buffering delays the processing of
the next stages, the overall throughput does not decrease,

Kernel Mapping

In this section, we describe how UniZK maps each kernel
in the ZKP protocol (Sections 5.1 to 5.4) onto the general
hardware architecture in the last section. UniZK follows a
static scheduling approach. Given the specific arithmetic
circuit to prove, the kernels to execute are all known before
execution. Thus we employ a compiler to map each kernel
(Section 5.5), following the schemes described below.
5.1 NTT
NTT is a widely used primitive in cryptography, and has
been extensively studied in previous accelerators for fully
homomorphic encryption and EC-based ZKP algorithms [35,
36, 59, 60, 65, 72]. An NTT applied to the 𝑁 coefficients of
a polynomial consists of log 𝑁 stages, where the 𝑖th stage
conducts 𝑁 /2 butterfly operations between all pairs of coefficients with a strided distance of 𝑁 /2𝑖 . Each butterfly
operation also needs a constant twiddle factor that is a certain power of the 𝑁 th root of unity in the finite integer field.
This pattern is similar to the well-known fast Fourier transform (FFT), but conducted on the integer field rather than
the complex numbers. The result of an NTT is also a size-𝑁
vector representing the 𝑁 values of the polynomial evaluated at the roots of unity. It can be converted back to the

1106

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

and the pipeline delays can be tolerated when there are sufficient data waiting for NTT processing. Note that UniZK
supports both DIT and DIF dataflows to support different
NTT variants. Compared with DIF, DIT just has reversed
element orders and different twiddle factors across all of the
stages. We just need to change the corresponding PE register
file contents and how they are accessed.
Second, the inter-dimension twiddle multiplications are
simple element-wise operations, so they can be easily mapped
to a PE and chained with the above NTT pipeline either at
the beginning or at the end. The twiddle factors needed in
this phase are generated on-the-fly [36, 65] using the twiddle factor generator in Figure 3a rather than stored on-chip.
However, if we want to maintain the same throughput of 2
elements per cycle, we now need two multipliers, one per
each element, instead of one multiplier per each pair in the
butterfly operations. Fortunately, we notice one of the NTT
stages (e.g., the last stage of DIF in Figure 4a) always multiplies with a twiddle factor of 1 = 𝜔𝑛0 . Thus we reuse this PE,
and only one extra PE is added to the pipeline. In Figure 4a,
the last two PEs multiply with 𝑁 −1𝑔 −𝑖 , which is the twiddle
factor in the last round of a coset-iNTT (more details below).
In summary, we map a size-𝑛 NTT to a sequence of log 𝑛+1
PEs in a pipelined manner. Recall that each VSA row/column
has 12 PEs. Using the entire row/column as a single pipeline
would set 𝑛 = 211 , requiring too much register space in each
PE for data buffering and twiddle storage. We thus split a
row of PEs into two pipelines with 6 PEs each for 𝑛 = 25 .
The register usage is now bound to 25 64-bit elements per PE.
With such a split, we can further pipeline the NTTs along
two decomposed dimensions on the two half-arrays, with a
transpose buffer in between, as in Figure 4b. This reduces
the bandwidth requirement on the global scratchpad by 2×.
Data layouts. Our NTT pipeline design described above
accepts/generates data elements consecutively from/to memory if data are in the polynomial-major layout. To also support the index-major layout, we conduct batched NTTs and
transpose the data layout using the global transpose buffer.
Specifically, we process 𝑏 polynomials in parallel as a batch,
where the transpose buffer can store 𝑏 × 𝑏 elements in its capacity. When data are in index-major, we fetch 𝑏 consecutive
elements each time from memory, which are the elements at
the same position of the polynomials in the batch. These elements are transposed in the buffer to polynomial-major, and
then fed into the VSAs. Writing data back in the index-major
order is performed similarly. In practice, we use 𝑏 = 16, so
the memory accesses are sufficiently consecutive while the
transpose buffer capacity is still acceptable.
NTT variants. Recall that we need to support both NTT
and iNTT, as well as their coset variants [6]. Also the input
and output data orders could be either natural or bit-reverse
(NN, NR, etc.). For the variants that require modular multiplying with a constant after the standard NTT, e.g., 𝑁 −1 for
iNTT and 𝑁 −1𝑔 −𝑖 for coset-iNTT, we use the PEs reserved

MDC Pipeline
PE

PE

PE

PE

3210

54 10

6 4 2 0

6 4 2 0

7654

76 32

7 5 3 1

Mul

(a) A size-8 DIF NTT mapped to the MDC pipeline. Numbers indicate element
indices. The last two stages conduct inter-dimension twiddle multiplications.
Dataflow

VSA
Transpose Buffer

Pipelines

Pipelines

(b) Mapping NTT onto VSA, with data transpose between two pipelines.

Figure 4. NTT mapping strategies. We show the example of
using an 8 × 8 PE array for a size-512 coset-iNTT, which is
decomposed into 3D size-8 DIF NTTs.

for inter-dimension twiddle multiplications in the last round,
which are idle otherwise. This is because for 𝑘 dimensions of
decomposed NTTs, inter-dimension twiddle multiplications
are only performed between dimensions for 𝑘 − 1 times. In
these situations, the DIF dataflow is used, so the pipeline
begins with the NTT and ends with inter-dimension twiddle
multiplications. Similarly, the constant multiplications before
the standard NTT, e.g., 𝑔𝑖 for coset-NTT, reuse the idle PEs
in the DIT pipeline of the first round.
To efficiently perform NTTNR , the output elements should
be written back to memory in the bit-reverse order, while
still keeping sufficient continuity in these memory accesses.
We leverage the multi-dimensional NTT decomposition inherently supported by our hardware to naturally realize this
requirement. Using the example in Figure 4b, a size-512 NTT
is decomposed into 8 × 8 × 8. The input side accesses data
consecutively along the innermost (first) dimension (of stride
1), while the output side finishes the outermost (last) dimension (of stride 64). From the element index perspective, the
first/last dimensions correspond to the lowest/highest 3 bits
in the index; e.g., 0, 64, . . . , 384, 448 have their highest 3 bits
as 0002, 0012, . . . , 1102, 1112 , and their rest lower bits are all
0. When they are bit-reversed, the highest bits become the
lowest ones, so these indices become 0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7. After a
local shuffle among this short list of elements in the on-chip
global scratchpad buffer, off-chip memory access continuity
could be realized.

1107

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

5.2

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

Poseidon Hash

6 Columns

Algorithm 1: Poseidon Permutation in Plonky2
Input/output : state[12]
function FullRound(state, 𝑟 ):
2
for 𝑖 ← 0 to 11 do
3
state[𝑖] ← state[𝑖] + RoundConst[𝑟 ] [𝑖];
4
state[𝑖] ← state[𝑖] 7 ;

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

1

5
6

state ← state × MDSMatrix;
return state;

(a) Full round of Poseidon hash, using 12 × 8 PEs.

function PartialRound(state, 𝑟 ):
state[0] ← state[0] 7 ;
9
state[0] ← state[0] + PartialRoundConst[𝑟 ];
10
state ← state × SparseMDSMatrix;
11
return state;
7

8

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

PE

SparseMDSMatrix

function PrePartialRound(state):
state ← state + PrePartialRoundConst;
14
state ← state × PreMDSMatrix;
15
return state;

12

13

for 𝑟 ← 0 to 3 do state ← FullRound(state, 𝑟 ) ;
state ← PrePartialRound(state)
18 for 𝑟 ← 0 to 21 do state ← PartialRound(state, 𝑟 ) ;
19 for 𝑟 ← 4 to 7 do state ← FullRound(state, 𝑟 ) ;
16

(b) Partial round of Poseidon hash, using 12 × 3 PEs.

17

Figure 5. Poseidon hash mapping strategies.

In Plonky2 and Starky, the Poseidon hash function is used
in many places, such as Merkle tree construction, generating
verifier randomness with Fiat-Shamir transforms, and proofof-work computations. As shown in Algorithm 1, this hash
function processes 12 64-bit Goldilocks elements as the state,
and uses 𝑥 7 as the S-box. It consists of 8 full rounds and 22
partial rounds to ensure 128-bit security.
Despite of the various irregular processing rounds in Poseidon hash, we are able to map it onto our general hardware
structure. We design three schemes for FullRound, PartialRound, and PrePartialRound, respectively. The key is to efficiently use only the limited neighbor PE links in the VSA.
Full round. The first step in a full round is to add a constant value to each element in state and raise to the 7th
power (Lines 2 to 4 in Algorithm 1). We use a row of 4 PEs to
compute this step, where data are transmitted horizontally.
Then, the state vector is multiplied with a matrix MDSMatrix
(Line 5). When there are many individual Poseidon hashes
to compute, this becomes a matrix multiplication, and is naturally mapped to a systolic array of 12 × 12. In total the full
round needs 12 rows × 16 columns. We fold the computation
by performing two consecutive operations on one PE, and
map it to a 12 × 8 region of the VSA, as in Figure 5a.
Pre-processing of partial round. Similar to the full
round, the pre-processing of a partial round consists of adding
a constant vector to state and performing a matrix multiplication. Since each PE in the VSA has a modular adder besides

the multiplier, we can merge the constant addition to the first
column of the matrix multiplication, and the whole round is
mapped to the 12 × 12 systolic array, without folding.
Partial round. The partial round is the most complex one.
First, we need to operate on a single element state[0] (Lines 8
to 9 in Algorithm 1). Then, the multiplication is with a sparse
matrix (Line 10), with non-zero values only in the first row,
the first column, and the diagonal, i.e., SparseMDSMatrix is
decomposed into 𝑢, 𝑣, and 𝐸 as in Figure 5b.
We first use the first column of PEs to perform the scalar
operations on state[0] in a pipelined way, with data flowing
from top to bottom vertically. Then, we use the newly added
reverse links of the second PE column to distribute the result
to all rows. At the same time, we transmit each element of
state to each of the 12 rows, and perform the dot product
between the two vectors state and 𝑢 in the second PE column.
The result of this dot product, as a scalar that is added to
the result of state[0], is accumulated vertically from bottom
to top also using the reversed links, and received at the top
PE. We use the third column to compute the scalar-vector
multiply-add, i.e., state[0] ×𝑣 +state, where the scalar state[0]
has been distributed to all rows as described above. Register
file space is used to buffer data and match their arrival timing
at each PE throughout the process. The final result comes
out at the right boundary. In summary, we use 12 × 3 PEs to
compute one partial round, and the entire VSA can process
four consecutive partial rounds together. The total latency of

1108

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

four partial rounds is 145 cycles, but with systolic pipelining,
the array can accept one 12-element state every cycle.

Register File

5.3 Merkle Tree
A Merkle tree [45] is usually a binary tree. The data blocks
are assigned to the leaf nodes, each of which stores the result
of applying the specific hash function to its own block. Then,
each parent node in the tree stores the hash result of the
concatenated content of both its child nodes. In this way, the
root hash becomes a summary of all the data blocks. Updating
or verifying any single block only involves computations
along the path from this block to the root.
To construct the Merkle tree, each time we load a subtree whose size fits in the scratchpad, and fully process the
subtree on-chip. The data of the lower tree levels are read,
and our hardware computes the data of the higher levels in
the bottom-up order. The hash computations at the same
tree level are independent, and performed either in parallel on different VSAs, or in a pipelined manner to one VSA
(Section 5.2). The memory layout of the Merkle tree nodes
follows the level order, which ensures long sequential memory accesses as well as efficient data caching on-chip when
going from one level to the next.
Since the length of the leaf nodes (e.g., 135) may be longer
than the length of the Poseidon state, Plonky2 uses the absorb
method [51]. At the leaf level, we pop the first 8 elements
of the leaf and use them as state[0 : 8], one at a time, until
the leaf is used up. For the other nodes, a Poseidon state is
created by combining 4 elements from each of its left and
right children, and padding with 4 zeros to get 12 elements.

(a) Quotient chunk products.
PE 1

PE 2

Timeline

PE 0

(b) Partial products.

Figure 6. Mapping strategies for partial products of quotient
polynomial chunks.
larger batch sizes. Finally, in addition to the LRU policy, our
compiler also incorporates hand-crafted replacement policies for certain critical code regions to further maximize
data reuse. For example, the evaluation of gate constraints in
Plonky2 processes the polynomials of all gates in the circuits
on the same wire data. To better reuse the wire data, we
prioritize them on-chip and try to replace other data.
Partial products. Besides element-wise operations, there
is another critical vector computation during the verification of copy constraints in the Plonk phase. Specifically, the
polynomials 𝑓 (𝑥) and 𝑔(𝑥) in the copy constraints (Figure 1)
are divided to obtain a quotient polynomial 𝑞(𝑥). Then we
use the quotient chunk product 𝑃𝑃 to reduce the degree of
the quotient polynomial. Specifically,

5.4 Polynomial Operations
With NTTs, both polynomial additions and multiplications
can be transformed into element-wise vector additions and
multiplications. These element-wise operations are naturally
supported by the vector mode of our VSAs. The operand vectors are fetched from the global scratchpad to the PE register
files, and maximally reused inside the PE. Given the multiple functional units (modular adder/subtractor/multiplier)
in one PE, we also support chained operations to reduce
register access pressure [60].
Element-wise operations. Element-wise vector operations are known for their low computational intensity, and
can be easily bound by off-chip memory accesses. We apply
several techniques to improve their on-chip data reuse. First,
we use the standard LRU cache replacement policy as our
basic approach. Second, we adopt vector tiling, which splits
each vector into many tiles, and fully processes the same
tiles of many operand vectors that fit on-chip, before moving
to the next tile. Our compiler statically analyzes the vector
computation graph and determines the number of vectors to
buffer as well as their proper tile sizes. Note that compared
to the batch parallelization in the CPU implementation of
Plonky2 [51], our tiling is more aggressive and can use much

ℎ[𝑖] =

8𝑖+7
Ö
𝑗=8𝑖

𝑃𝑃 [𝑖] =

𝑖
Ö

𝑞[ 𝑗] =

8𝑖+7
Ö

𝑓 [ 𝑗]/𝑔[ 𝑗]

(1)

𝑗=8𝑖

ℎ[ 𝑗] = 𝑃𝑃 [𝑖 − 1] × ℎ[𝑖]

(2)

𝑗=0

where ℎ is the product of each 8-element chunk of 𝑞(𝑥), and
the partial products 𝑃𝑃 are obtained by accumulating these
quotient chunk products. While Equation (1) can be easily
processed in parallel, Equation (2) exhibits a long sequential
dependency chain between 𝑃𝑃 [𝑖] and 𝑃𝑃 [𝑖 − 1].
To efficiently map the above computations, we first make
each PE compute 16 quotient polynomials 𝑞[𝑖] and accumulate them into 2 chunks ℎ[𝑖], as in Figure 6a. This is
constrained by the available register file capacity. Then we

1109

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

Table 2. Area and power breakdown of UniZK.

reorganize ℎ[𝑖] into groups through the global scratchpad,
where the 𝑘th group 𝑧𝑘 contains 𝑛 = 32 chunks of 𝑧𝑘 [𝑖] =
ℎ[𝑘𝑛 + 𝑖], 𝑖 = 0, 1, . . . , 𝑛 − 1, and is stored to one PE’s register
file. The partial product then proceeds in three steps as in
Figure 6b. First, each PE locally computes the partial prodÎ𝑗
ucts within its group 𝑧𝑘 , i.e., 𝑍𝑘 [ 𝑗] = 𝑖=0
𝑧𝑘 [𝑖]. Then, the
PEs propagate their last products, i.e., 𝑍𝑘 [𝑛 − 1], to the next
neighbors and compute their partial products. Finally, each
PE uses the received partial product from the previous neighbor, and multiplies it with each of the previous calculated
𝑍𝑘 [ 𝑗], to obtain the final results.

Power (W)

32 VSAs
8 MB scratchpad
Twiddle factor generator
Transpose buffer
2 HBM PHYs

21.3
5.0
0.8
0.9
29.8

58.0
1.0
2.6
3.1
31.7

Total

57.8

96.4

Baselines. We mainly compare UniZK with CPU and
GPU baselines for hash-based ZKPs, as well as a previous
accelerator, PipeZK [72], which targets EC-based ZKPs. For
CPU solutions, we use a server with two 20-core Intel Xeon
Gold 5218R processors operating at 2.1 GHz, with 8 channels of DDR4 memory of 32 GB capacity and approximately
200 GB/s bandwidth. We use all the 80 threads to run parallel
Plonky2 programs.
The GPU baseline runs a Plonky2 CUDA implementation [54] on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. The A100 GPU features
80 GB memory and 2 TB/s bandwidth. The GPU code primarily focuses on accelerating NTT, Merkle tree, and elementwise polynomial computations. The other kernels are still
executed on the host CPU.
Applications. We use a variety of typical ZKP applications to measure the performance improvement of UniZK.
(1) Factorial [51]. The prover demonstrates the correct calculation of the factorial of 220 using ZKP. (2) Fibonacci [51].
The prover generates a proof of knowing the 220 -th number in the Fibonacci sequence. (3) ECDSA [1] is a digital
signature algorithm based on elliptic curve cryptography.
The authenticity of the prover’s signature is ensured using
ZKP. We test it on a task of signing a 256-bit random file
hash. (4) SHA-256 [53] is a cryptographic hash function. The
prover uses ZKP to demonstrate the possession of a message
corresponding to a specific hash. We evaluate SHA-256 on
a 8000 B message with 126 blocks. (5) Image Crop [2]. The
prover generates a proof of cropping a 512 × 512 block from
a 1024 × 1024 RGBA PNG image at the left-top corner. (6)
MVM [67] (matrix-vector multiplication) is extensively used
in scientific computing and neural networks. We test with a
3000 × 3000 16-bit matrix. In all workloads, we use typical
configurations of Plonky2 and Starky aimed at achieving
approximately 100 bits of conjectured security [51, 64].

5.5 Implementation
The above mapping strategies of the various ZKP kernels
are implemented with a customized compiler in our design.
Currently, the frontend of our compiler is done manually, i.e.,
converting functions in standard ZKP libraries into speciallydefined computation graphs. Figure 7 illustrates an example.
The execution starts with the Wires Commitment function,
which is parsed into three steps: iNTT, NTT, and Merkle tree.
The Get Challenges function is part of the Fiat-Shamir transform, and only requires hash computations. The computation
graph also executes many other functions, and eventually
ends with the Prove Openings function that involves hash
and polynomial kernels.
Our backend implementation takes such computation
graphs as input, and maps each kernel to our hardware in a
fully automated way, incorporating the proposed novel techniques. The backend outputs detailed schedules that describe
how the kernels execute on the hardware, including how to
fetch the data from memory, parallelize the computations
on multiple PEs in the VSAs, and dictate the on-chip data
communication between PEs.

6

Area (mm2 )

Component

Methodology

We have developed comprehensive RTL implementations
for the key components in UniZK, including the VSA, the
transpose unit, and the twiddle factor generator. We have
extensively verified their functionality correctness. We synthesize these modules using the ASAP 7 nm technology. Additionally, we use FN-CACTI [55] to model the scratchpad
and transpose buffers. Our default configuration has 32 VSAs
and an 8 MB scratchpad. We equip the chip with two HBM2e
PHYs [29, 47], achieving peak bandwidth of approximately
1 TB/s. The overall chip operates at 1 GHz, with power consumption of 64 W to the logic and 32 W to the HBM PHYs.
Table 2 shows the detailed area and power breakdown per
component in UniZK.
We also build a cycle-accurate simulator for UniZK to
evaluate its performance on complex workloads. We use Ramulator2 [42] to model the off-chip DRAM access timing. The
simulator is validated against our RTL implementations. It is
open-sourced at https://github.com/tsinghua-ideal/UniZK.

7

Evaluation

7.1 Performance Comparison
Table 3 shows the overall performance comparison between
UniZK and the CPU and GPU baselines. For each application, we report the end-to-end proof generation time and
the speedup over the CPU. The GPU solution cannot generate an entire proof on itself but must rely on the CPU for
certain kernels, which causes back-and-forth data transfers.

1110

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Wires Commitment

Get Challenges

NTT

Hash

iNTT

Merkle Tree

Prove Openings
Hash

Polynomial

Figure 7. An example of the static computation graph in our compiler implementation.
Table 3. Overall performance comparison between UniZK
and the CPU and GPU baselines for Plonky2.

Factorial
Fibonacci
ECDSA
SHA-256
Image Crop
MVM

57.561
3.373
7.463
55.445
23.765
39.669

Execution Time Breakdown

Application

CPU
Time (s)

GPU
Time (s) Speedup
26.673
0.736
2.063
26.845
16.182
33.383

2.2×
4.6×
3.6×
2.1×
1.5×
1.2×

Table 4. Memory and VSA utilization breakdown in UniZK.

UniZK
Time (s) Speedup
0.828
0.023
0.065
0.908
0.373
0.320

100

70×
147×
115×
61×
64×
124×

0

i
6
ial
SA
rop
25
acc
Aon
CD
eC
b
g
H
E
i
a
S
F
Im

r
cto

Fa

NTT
Memory VSA

Poly
Memory VSA

Hash
Memory VSA

Factorial
Fibonacci
ECDSA
SHA-256
Image Crop
MVM

47.6%
55.5%
56.4%
47.4%
54.0%
53.0%

15.7%
17.9%
15.4%
13.6%
13.5%
24.5%

20.6%
20.6%
20.6%
20.7%
20.7%
21.7%

4.3%
5.0%
5.0%
4.3%
4.8%
4.8%

2.0%
5.8%
9.2%
1.9%
2.2%
5.9%

96.9%
96.7%
96.1%
97.2%
97.1%
95.3%

running, so this cost is eliminated in UniZK and not shown
in the breakdown. We see that after efficient acceleration of
the NTT and hash functions, the miscellaneous polynomial
operations now account for the majority of the execution
time, and become the bottleneck. Figure 9 also confirms this
observation, where the speedup of the polynomial kernels is
relatively lower than the other two kernel types. The NTT
speedup is also generally lower than that of hashes, because
NTT is mainly memory-bound.
While the above results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our NTT and hash mapping strategies with up to 191×
speedups, we also want to investigate why the polynomial
kernels are not so efficient, with only moderate speedups of
20× to 92×. We find that during gate evaluation, we usually
have pseudo-randomly data accesses where the accessed
indices are determined by, e.g., bit-reversed operations. The
access data size is constrained by the width and some other
parameters of the arithmetic circuit. Usually the circuit width
is not very large, e.g., 135, and the other parameters could
be as low as 2. Therefore these random memory accesses
have limited size, and underutilize the memory bandwidth.
An exception is MVM, whose circuit width is as high as
400, thereby improving bandwidth utilization and offering a
higher speedup for polynomial computations in Figure 9.

Legend
NTT
Poly
Hash

50

Application

M
MV

Figure 8. Performance breakdown by kernel types in UniZK.

Figure 9. Speedups by kernel types in UniZK.
Even for the GPU running kernels, operations such as NTTs
require irregular memory accesses that are not friendly to
GPUs. Overall, the GPU speedups are limited to up to 4.6×.
In contrast, UniZK achieves much more significant improvements, from 61× to 147×, and on average 97× over the CPU.
Compared to the GPU, UniZK is still 46× faster on average.
In Figure 8, we further break down the execution time
of UniZK by kernel types, into three major components:
NTTs, element-wise polynomial computations, and hash
computations (including Merkle tree and other hashes). Note
that unlike the CPU, in UniZK the global transpose buffer
manages data transpose and other layout transformations
implicitly and in parallel with one of the computation kernels

7.2 Resource Utilization
Table 4 summarizes the utilization of memory bandwidth
and VSAs, respectively, for each application. NTTs exhibit
the highest bandwidth utilization but low VSA utilization,
due to their memory-bound nature. In contrast, hash computations demonstrate the highest VSA utilization, with moderate bandwidth usage. The Poseidon hash function involves
several on-chip matrix-vector multiplications after fetching
a single input state, making it mostly compute-bound. Polynomial computations, on the other hand, show relatively low
utilization on both memory bandwidth and VSA logic. This
matches the previous results of their lower speedups.

1111

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

Table 6. Performance comparison on the CPU and the ASIC
accelerators (UniZK and PipeZK [72]) with two ZKP protocols of Starky + Plonky2 and Groth16.
CPU Time (s)
Starky +
Groth16
Plonky2

Table 5. Overall performance comparison between UniZK
and the CPU baseline for Starky + Plonky2.
Stage

CPU
Time (s)

UniZK
Time (ms)

Speedup

Size (kB)

Factorial

Base
Recursive

2.8
1.7

42
12

67×
142×

261
155

Fibonacci

Base
Recursive

2.3
1.9

26
12

88×
158×

259
155

SHA-256

Base
Recursive

0.8
2.0

3
12

267×
167×

778
187

Speedup

PipeZK

UniZK

PipeZK

UniZK

SHA-256

1.5

2.0

102

12.6

15×

159×

AES-128

1.1

3.4

97

27.7

12×

123×

7.5 Comparison with Previous ZKP Accelerators
PipeZK [72] is a state-of-the-art ZKP accelerator that targets
the Groth16 protocol. We conduct a preliminary comparison
between UniZK and PipeZK. Since the hardware architecture
and the protocol algorithm are both different, a direct fair
comparison is difficult. We thus evaluate both the CPU and
the ASIC accelerator to gain better insights. We use two applications, SHA-256 and AES-128, both processing one data
block, as in the original PipeZK paper [72]. This allows us to
directly compare with their reported performance numbers.
We can see from Table 6 that, when running on the CPU,
Starky + Plonky2 is slower than Groth16. This is because
Starky + Plonky2 is dominated by the time of recursively
compressing the proof, while the base proof generation part
is short due to the small number of (a single) block being
processed. If we use the corresponding ASIC designs to accelerate the two protocols, respectively, UniZK’s speedup
over the CPU baseline is 10.6× higher than PipeZK’s. PipeZK
leaves some work to the CPU, while UniZK supports end-toend proof generation thanks to its general unified hardware
design. But even if we look at the ASIC-only portion of
PipeZK, which is about 1/4 to 1/3 of the end-to-end time,
UniZK’s speedup is still higher. This result implies that the
hardware accelerator design of UniZK is more efficient than
PipeZK. If we directly compare the two accelerators, we see
3.5× to 8.1× speedups.
Actually, the above applications of processing a single
data block are not the best way to use Starky + Plonky2. If
we can generate the proofs for multiple blocks at once, as in
Table 5, only the base proof time increases, while the cost
of the recursive compression can be amortized. UniZK can
achieve over 8400 blocks per second for SHA-256. Compared
to PipeZK, which processes 10 blocks per second for SHA256, UniZK achieves a 840× speedup.

Figure 10. Performance sensitivity of UniZK when scaling
different hardware configurations. With MVM.

Application

ASIC Time (ms)

7.3 Design Space Exploration
Figure 10 illustrates the normalized performance of UniZK on
the MVM task, when various hardware resources are scaled
up and down. We individually adjust the SRAM scratchpad
size, the number of VSAs, and the memory bandwidth, to
investigate their impact on UniZK. Reducing the scratchpad
size or memory bandwidth affects the NTT and polynomial
operations due to their memory bottlenecks. Additionally,
the Merkle tree’s performance is primarily dependent on the
number of VSAs, which facilitates high parallelization.
7.4 Performance of Starky
To demonstrate the generality of supporting different ZKP
protocols, we combine Starky and Plonky2 in the way described in Section 2.1, i.e., using Starky for the base proofs,
followed by Plonky2 to aggregate the proofs to compress
the proof size. The total execution time is the sum of the
two stages. We select three applications that have existing
Starky implementations [3, 52], using the same parameter
set as those on Plonky2. Table 5 shows that, compared to
the CPU, UniZK achieves the maximum speedup of 267×.
Compared with running the same application with Plonky2
on UniZK (Table 3), running with Starky could achieve about
61× performance improvements.

8

Related Work and Further Discussion

PipeZK [72] is an ASIC designed for the Groth16 protocol [27]. It incorporates two modules to accelerate the two
most expensive kernels, NTT and MSM. However, it requires
collaboration with the host CPU and thus cannot achieve
full end-to-end acceleration. The nature of the EC-based algorithm also constrains its performance. SZKP [14], on the

1112

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

other hand, is a ZKP accelerator framework for end-to-end
Groth16 proof generation. It adds support for sparse MSM
which is handled by the CPU in PipeZK. SZKP uses highlevel synthesis to generate accelerators in a scalable way,
offering options from large, highly parallel designs to small
cores. Finally, a concurrent work, NoCap [61], proposes an
accelerator designed for hash-based ZKP protocols, specifically Spartan [62] and Orion [70]. It integrates a variety
of functional units targeting different kernels, such as NTT,
hashing, sparse matrix-vector multiplications, etc. Compared
to NoCap, UniZK has a different design philosophy, mapping
variable kernels onto unified hardware, resulting in more
area-efficient architectural designs.
On GPUs, cuZK [40], an efficient GPU implementation
to accelerate ZKP, achieves significant speedups by parallelizing operations and reducing CPU-GPU data transfers.
GZKP [43] leverages GPU acceleration for ZKP, with special
focuses on optimizing memory access patterns and parallelizing computational tasks. Ji et al. propose DistMSM [30], a
highly optimized algorithm for the MSM task on multi-GPU
systems. They leverage GPU shared memories to alleviate
register pressures and utilize tensor cores to accelerate large
integer multiplications on elliptic curves. On the other hand,
Huang et al. [28] propose a CPU-GPU collaborative acceleration approach for the bulletproofs protocol [9].
Several works have utilized FPGAs to accelerate EC-based
ZKPs, with a particular focus on the MSM kernel [4, 41, 56,
69]. The state-of-the-art solution for FPGA-based MSM is
BSTMSM [73], which introduces a dedicated RAM to track
the state of buckets in the Pippenger algorithm, thereby eliminating bucket collisions and improving hardware utilization.
On CPUs and distributed clusters, DIZK [68] utilizes a
computer cluster to enable proof generation for large arithmetic circuits with up to billions of gates, which overcomes
the resource limitation on a single server. ZENO [19] focuses
on optimizing the proof generation for neural network inferences in the ZKML domain. It integrates a framework that
maintains the semantics of neural networks, and enables
more parallelization opportunities through techniques such
as data encoding and tensor-level and layer-level scheduling.

matrices. Such matrix and tensor computations are inherently suitable for systolic arrays [33]. Thus it is promising
to unify the diverse kernels on the common data structure
to the same architecture.
To see how UniZK may generalize, we examine several
recent ZKP protocols including Spartan [62], Binius [16, 17],
and Basefold [71]. Most of their components match well with
what we have already considered when designing UniZK,
such as sparse matrix-vector multiplications and polynomial
computations. Nevertheless, they also introduce a few new
primitives. A challenging one is the sum-check function
shown in Algorithm 2, following a dynamic programming
computation flow. Its main loop body contains two parts:
summing up the updated vector elements, and updating the
vector itself. An accelerator similar to UniZK can efficiently
execute the vector update operation similarly to elementwise polynomial operations. The data paths between PEs
can be utilized to compute the vector sum, similar to how
partial sums are accumulated in matrix multiplications. A
more detailed evaluation is beyond the scope of this paper.
Algorithm 2: Sum-Check
Input : An initial vector 𝐴[2𝑛 ], random numbers 𝑟 [𝑛].
Output : Results 𝑦 [𝑛] [2].
for 𝑖 ← 1 to 𝑛 do
𝑦 [𝑖] ← [0, 0];
3
for 𝑏 ← 0 to 2𝑛−𝑖 − 1 do

1

2

/* Sum up vector elements */
5

𝑦 [𝑖] [0] ← 𝑦 [𝑖] [0] + 𝐴[𝑏];
𝑦 [𝑖] [1] ← 𝑦 [𝑖] [1] + 𝐴[𝑏 + 2𝑛−𝑖 ];

6

𝐴[𝑏] ← (1 − 𝑟 [𝑖]) · 𝐴[𝑏] + 𝑟 [𝑖] · 𝐴[𝑏 + 2𝑛−𝑖 ];

4

/* Update vector (element-wise polynomial operations) */

9

Conclusions

In this paper, we propose UniZK, a general ZKP architecture
to accelerate emerging hash-based ZKP protocols beyond
classic EC-based ZKP schemes. UniZK uses a unified hardware architecture with systolic arrays of modular arithmetic
units to offer hardware efficiency. It then maps diverse ZKP
kernels onto such a generic template using novel mapping
strategies, while ensuring high resource utilization. UniZK
is significantly faster than the CPU and GPU baselines when
executing the Plonky2 and Starky protocols, and also substantially outperforms previous ZKP accelerators.

8.1 Generality to Other Protocols
The novelty of UniZK lies in its ability to map various kernels
onto the VSAs. This adaptability makes the design particularly suitable for the emerging hash-based ZKP protocols
that have diverse kernels. The concrete design of UniZK presented in this paper particularly focuses on Plonky2, and has
several specialized design choices like the 64-bit Goldilocks
field, the Poseidon hash function, etc. Nevertheless, we believe that the same design philosophy can be adapted to
other ZKP protocols, by making minor hardware changes in
a similar architecture, and proposing new kernel mapping
strategies. This is because, in modern cryptography, a key
data structure is polynomials, often organized as vectors or

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd David Kaeli for their valuable suggestions, and the
Tsinghua IDEAL group members for constructive discussion.
Mingyu Gao is the corresponding author.

1113

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

A

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

Artifact Appendix

RamSim is an enhanced version of Ramulator2 [42].
We add support for simulating the computation latency
and properly handling the data dependencies between
computations and memory accesses.

A.1 Abstract
The source code for the simulator used in this work is available at https://github.com/tsinghua-ideal/UniZK. All the experiments described in this paper can be reproduced using
the provided running scripts. The implementations of the
evaluated applications are in the examples directory.
We have included necessary third-party libraries in the
repository. The installation and build instructions are provided in the README.md file in the repository.
A.2

A.5

./ run_cpu_test . sh

• To reproduce UniZK’s simulation results in Table 3,
run the tests for applications using Plonky2:

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Compilation: Rust 1.8, g++ 11.4.
• Run-time environment: Ubuntu 22.04.
• Hardware: Intel Xeon Gold 5218R.
• Output: The number of cycles in the log files.
• How much disk space required (approximately)?:
1 TB for temporary trace file.
• How much time is needed to prepare workflow
(approximately)?: 30 minutes.
• How much time is needed to complete experiments (approximately)?: < 1 day for each experiment.
• Publicly available?: Yes.
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: BSD-3.

./ run_plonky2_test . sh

Run the tests for Starky and recursive proofs in Table 5
and Table 6:
./ run_starky_test . sh

These scripts will set up the required third-party libraries
and execute the experiments in the examples directory.
A.6 Evaluation and expected results
CPU baseline. When running the applications in Table 3
with Plonky2 on the CPU baseline, performance results are
logged to files prefixed with cpu_, e.g., cpu_ecdsa.log:
Number of CPUs: 80
...
prove_with_partition_witness took: 7 463 553 us

A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to access.
• Source code: https://github.com/tsinghua-ideal/UniZK.
A.3.2

This output indicates that the proof was generated in 7.46 s
using 80 threads.
Similarly, when running the applications in Table 5 and
Table 6 with Starky + Plonky2 on the CPU baseline, performance results are logged to files prefixed with cpu_ and
suffixed with _starky, e.g., cpu_factorial_starky.log:

Hardware dependencies.

• The code is tested on a server with two Intel Xeon Gold
5218R CPUs, 256 GB memory, and 4 TB disk space.
• Most experiments can run on a computer with an Intel
or AMD CPU, 32 GB memory, and 1 TB disk space.
A.3.3

Number of CPUs: 80
...
prove took: 2 792 781 us
Proof size: 260 688 bytes
...
prove_with_partition_witness took: 1 684 995 us
Recursive proof size: 155 380 bytes

Software dependencies.

• A recent Linux distribution.
• Rust 1.8.
• g++ 11.4.
• CMake 3.22.
A.4

Experiment workflow
• To reproduce the performance results of the CPU baseline in Table 3, run the script:

Installation
• Use a nightly toolchain for Plonky2.

This shows that the base proof generation took 2.8 s and
the recursive proof generation took 1.7 s. The corresponding
proof sizes are 261 kB and 155 kB, respectively.
UniZK. The experiment for each application in Table 3,
Table 5, and Table 6 creates a log file named after the application (e.g., sha256.log or sha256_starky.log).

rustup override set nightly

• Build RamSim.
cd thirdparty / ramsim
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make -j

total_num_write_requests: 11704733
total_num_read_requests: 11946930
memory_system_cycles: 4207818

1114

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

This indicates that UniZK performed 11704733 write requests and 11946930 read requests, each involving 64 bytes
of data. The reported cycles of 4207818, at a clock speed of
1 GHz, translate to an execution time of 4.2 ms.

[10] Yu-Hsin Chen, Joel S. Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2016. Eyeriss: A Spatial
Architecture for Energy-Efficient Dataflow for Convolutional Neural Networks. In 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA).
[11] Alessandro Chiesa, Yuncong Hu, Mary Maller, Pratyush Mishra, Noah
Vesely, and Nicholas Ward. 2020. Marlin: Preprocessing zkSNARKs
with Universal and Updatable SRS. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT.
[12] Henri Cohen, Gerhard Frey, Roberto Avanzi, Christophe Doche, Tanja
Lange, Kim Nguyen, and Frederik Vercauteren. 2012. Handbook of
Elliptic and Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography (2nd ed.). Chapman &
Hall/CRC.
[13] Véronique Cortier, Alexandre Debant, Anselme Goetschmann, and
Lucca Hirschi. 2024. Election Eligibility with OpenID: Turning Authentication into Transferable Proof of Eligibility. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Paper 2024/261.
[14] Alhad Daftardar, Brandon Reagen, and Siddharth Garg. 2024. SZKP:
A Scalable Accelerator Architecture for Zero-Knowledge Proofs. In
International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT).
[15] Sai Deng and Bo Du. 2023. zkTree: A Zero-Knowledge Recursion
Tree with ZKP Membership Proofs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2023/208.
[16] Benjamin E. Diamond and Jim Posen. 2023. Succinct Arguments over
Towers of Binary Fields. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1784.
[17] Benjamin E. Diamond and Jim Posen. 2024. Polylogarithmic Proofs for
Multilinears over Binary Towers. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2024/504.
[18] Electron-Labs. 2024. eth-lc-plonky2. https://github.com/ElectronLabs/eth-lc-plonky2.
[19] Boyuan Feng, Zheng Wang, Yuke Wang, Shu Yang, and Yufei Ding.
2024. ZENO: A Type-Based Optimization Framework for Zero Knowledge Neural Network Inference. In 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS).
[20] Amos Fiat and Adi Shamir. 1986. How To Prove Yourself: Practical
Solutions to Identification and Signature Problems. In Advances in
Cryptology — CRYPTO.
[21] Jeremy Fowers, Kalin Ovtcharov, Michael Papamichael, Todd Massengill, Ming Liu, Daniel Lo, Shlomi Alkalay, Michael Haselman,
Logan Adams, Mahdi Ghandi, Stephen Heil, Prerak Patel, Adam
Sapek, Gabriel Weisz, Lisa Woods, Sitaram Lanka, Steven K. Reinhardt, Adrian M. Caulfield, Eric S. Chung, and Doug Burger. 2018. A
Configurable Cloud-Scale DNN Processor for Real-Time AI. In 45th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[22] Ariel Gabizon, Zachary J. Williamson, and Oana Ciobotaru. 2019.
PLONK: Permutations over Lagrange-Bases for Oecumenical Noninteractive Arguments of Knowledge. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2019/953.
[23] Mingyu Gao, Xuan Yang, Jing Pu, Mark Horowitz, and Christos
Kozyrakis. 2019. TANGRAM: Optimized Coarse-Grained Dataflow
for Scalable NN Accelerators. In 24th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS).
[24] Mario Garrido. 2022. A Survey on Pipelined FFT Hardware Architectures. Journal of Signal Processing Systems (2022).
[25] Hasan Genc, Seah Kim, Alon Amid, Ameer Haj-Ali, Vighnesh Iyer,
Pranav Prakash, Jerry Zhao, Daniel Grubb, Harrison Liew, Howard
Mao, Albert Ou, Colin Schmidt, Samuel Steffl, John Wright, Ion Stoica, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Krste Asanovic, Borivoje Nikolic, and
Yakun Sophia Shao. 2021. Gemmini: Enabling Systematic DeepLearning Architecture Evaluation via Full-Stack Integration. In 58th
ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC).

A.7 Experiment customization
For each application in Table 3, the provided command in
run_plonky2_test.sh could be customized in several ways
using command-line arguments, as shown in the following
example:
cargo run -- release -- example ecdsa \
-- -r 8 -t 32 -e 0

These arguments have the following meanings:
• -r: the scratchpad capacity in MB.
• -t: the number of VSAs.
• -e: the target kernel for simulation during proof generation, 0 for NTTs only, 1 for hash computations only.
Omitting -e simulates the entire proof generation.
These arguments can be used to reproduce the results
presented in Figure 8 and Figure 10.
A.8

Note
• The current simulator is built entirely on a singlethreaded implementation, which results in relatively
long simulation time. This long simulation duration is
not related to UniZK’s performance.
• The GPU performance in Table 3 can be evaluated using the GPU implementation of Plonky2 [54] with our
CPU-based application code located in the examples
directory.

References
[1] 2023. plonky2-ecdsa. https://github.com/qope/plonky2-examples.
[2] 2023. plonky2-zkedit. https://github.com/ChickenLover/plonky2zkedit.
[3] 2023. sha256-starky. https://github.com/tumberger/plonky2/tree/
sha256-starky.
[4] Kaveh Aasaraai, Don Beaver, Emanuele Cesena, Rahul Maganti, Nicolas Stalder, and Javier Varela. 2022. FPGA Acceleration of MultiScalar Multiplication: CycloneMSM. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2022/1396.
[5] Eli Ben-Sasson, Iddo Bentov, Yinon Horesh, and Michael Riabzev. 2018.
Fast Reed-Solomon Interactive Oracle Proofs of Proximity. In 45th
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
(ICALP).
[6] Eli Ben-Sasson, Lior Goldberg, Swastik Kopparty, and Shubhangi Saraf.
2019. DEEP-FRI: Sampling Outside the Box Improves Soundness.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2019/336.
[7] Sean Bowe, Jack Grigg, and Daira Hopwood. 2019. Recursive Proof
Composition without a Trusted Setup. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2019/1021.
[8] Benedikt Bünz, Ben Fisch, and Alan Szepieniec. 2020. Transparent
SNARKs from DARK Compilers. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT.
[9] Benedikt Bünz, Jonathan Bootle, Dan Boneh, Andrew Poelstra, Pieter
Wuille, and Greg Maxwell. 2018. Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Confidential Transactions and More. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (S&P).

1115

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao

[26] Lorenzo Grassi, Dmitry Khovratovich, Christian Rechberger, Arnab
Roy, and Markus Schofnegger. 2021. Poseidon: A New Hash Function
for Zero-Knowledge Proof Systems. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security).
[27] Jens Groth. 2016. On the Size of Pairing-Based Non-Interactive Arguments. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT. 305–326.
[28] Ying Huang, Xiaoying Zheng, Yongxin Zhu, Xiangcong Kong, and
Xinru Jing. 2021. CPU-GPU Collaborative Acceleration of Bulletproofs
- A Zero-Knowledge Proof Algorithm. In 2021 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel
& Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing &
Networking (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom).
[29] Rambus Inc. 2020. White Paper: HBM2E and GDDR6: Memory Solutions for AI.
[30] Zhuoran Ji, Zhiyuan Zhang, Jiming Xu, and Lei Ju. 2024. Accelerating
Multi-Scalar Multiplication for Efficient Zero Knowledge Proofs with
Multi-GPU Systems. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS).
[31] Norm Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan,
Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian
Towles, Clifford Young, Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou, and David A
Patterson. 2023. TPU v4: An Optically Reconfigurable Supercomputer
for Machine Learning with Hardware Support for Embeddings. In 50th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[32] Norman P. Jouppi, Doe Hyun Yoon, Matthew Ashcraft, Mark Gottscho,
Thomas B. Jablin, George Kurian, James Laudon, Sheng Li, Peter Ma,
Xiaoyu Ma, Thomas Norrie, Nishant Patil, Sushma Prasad, Cliff Young,
Zongwei Zhou, and David Patterson. 2021. Ten Lessons From Three
Generations Shaped Google’s TPUv4i : Industrial Product. In 48th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[33] Norman P. Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, Rick Boyle, Pierre-luc Cantin, Clifford Chao, Chris
Clark, Jeremy Coriell, Mike Daley, Matt Dau, Jeffrey Dean, Ben Gelb,
Tara Vazir Ghaemmaghami, Rajendra Gottipati, William Gulland,
Robert Hagmann, C. Richard Ho, Doug Hogberg, John Hu, Robert
Hundt, Dan Hurt, Julian Ibarz, Aaron Jaffey, Alek Jaworski, Alexander Kaplan, Harshit Khaitan, Daniel Killebrew, Andy Koch, Naveen
Kumar, Steve Lacy, James Laudon, James Law, Diemthu Le, Chris
Leary, Zhuyuan Liu, Kyle Lucke, Alan Lundin, Gordon MacKean, Adriana Maggiore, Maire Mahony, Kieran Miller, Rahul Nagarajan, Ravi
Narayanaswami, Ray Ni, Kathy Nix, Thomas Norrie, Mark Omernick,
Narayana Penukonda, Andy Phelps, Jonathan Ross, Matt Ross, Amir
Salek, Emad Samadiani, Chris Severn, Gregory Sizikov, Matthew Snelham, Jed Souter, Dan Steinberg, Andy Swing, Mercedes Tan, Gregory
Thorson, Bo Tian, Horia Toma, Erick Tuttle, Vijay Vasudevan, Richard
Walter, Walter Wang, Eric Wilcox, and Doe Hyun Yoon. 2017. InDatacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit. In 44th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[34] Sheng-Chun Kao, Suvinay Subramanian, Gaurav Agrawal, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Tushar Krishna. 2023. FLAT: An Optimized Dataflow
for Mitigating Attention Bottlenecks. In 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS).
[35] Jongmin Kim, Gwangho Lee, Sangpyo Kim, Gina Sohn, Minsoo Rhu,
John Kim, and Jung Ho Ahn. 2022. ARK: Fully Homomorphic Encryption Accelerator with Runtime Data Generation and Inter-Operation
Key Reuse. In 55th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[36] Sangpyo Kim, Jongmin Kim, Michael Jaemin Kim, Wonkyung Jung,
John Kim, Minsoo Rhu, and Jung Ho Ahn. 2022. BTS: An Accelerator
for Bootstrappable Fully Homomorphic Encryption. In 49th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).

[37] Hsiang Tsung Kung and Charles E Leiserson. 1979. Systolic arrays
(for VLSI). In Sparse Matrix Proceedings.
[38] Sin7y Labs. 2022. OlaVM. https://github.com/Sin7Y/olavm.
[39] Liqiang Lu, Yicheng Jin, Hangrui Bi, Zizhang Luo, Peng Li, Tao Wang,
and Yun Liang. 2021. Sanger: A Co-Design Framework for Enabling
Sparse Attention using Reconfigurable Architecture. In 54th Annual
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[40] Tao Lu, Chengkun Wei, Ruijing Yu, Chaochao Chen, Wenjing Fang, Lei
Wang, Zeke Wang, and Wenzhi Chen. 2022. cuZK: Accelerating ZeroKnowledge Proof with A Faster Parallel Multi-Scalar Multiplication
Algorithm on GPUs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/1321.
[41] Guiwen Luo, Shihui Fu, and Guang Gong. 2023. Speeding Up MultiScalar Multiplication over Fixed Points Towards Efficient zkSNARKs.
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
(2023).
[42] Haocong Luo, Yahya Can Tuğrul, F. Nisa Bostancı, Ataberk Olgun,
A. Giray Yağlıkçı, and Onur Mutlu. 2024. Ramulator 2.0: A Modern,
Modular, and Extensible DRAM Simulator. IEEE Computer Architecture
Letters (2024).
[43] Weiliang Ma, Qian Xiong, Xuanhua Shi, Xiaosong Ma, Hai Jin, Haozhao
Kuang, Mingyu Gao, Ye Zhang, Haichen Shen, and Weifang Hu. 2023.
GZKP: A GPU Accelerated Zero-Knowledge Proof System. In 28th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS).
[44] Mateo Vázquez Maceiras, Muhammad Waqar Azhar, and Pedro Trancoso. 2022. VSA: A Hybrid Vector-Systolic Architecture. In 40th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD).
[45] Ralph C. Merkle. 1988. A Digital Signature Based on a Conventional
Encryption Function. In Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO.
[46] Thomas Norrie, Nishant Patil, Doe Hyun Yoon, George Kurian, Sheng
Li, James Laudon, Cliff Young, Norman P. Jouppi, and David Patterson.
2020. Google’s Training Chips Revealed: TPUv2 and TPUv3. In IEEE
Hot Chips 32 Symposium (HCS).
[47] Mike O’Connor, Niladrish Chatterjee, Donghyuk Lee, John Wilson,
Aditya Agrawal, Stephen W. Keckler, and William J. Dally. 2017. FineGrained DRAM: Energy-Efficient DRAM for Extreme Bandwidth Systems. In 50th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO).
[48] Angshuman Parashar, Minsoo Rhu, Anurag Mukkara, Antonio
Puglielli, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Brucek Khailany, Joel Emer,
Stephen W. Keckler, and William J. Dally. 2017. SCNN: An Accelerator for Compressed-Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks. In 44th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[49] Polygon. 2022. Introducing Plonky2. https://polygon.technology/blog/
introducing-plonky2.
[50] Polygon. 2024. zkEVM. https://github.com/0xPolygonZero/zk_evm.
[51] PolygonZero. 2022. Plonky2: Fast Recursive Arguments with PLONK
and FRI. https://github.com/mir-protocol/plonky2/blob/main/plonky2/
plonky2.pdf.
[52] PolygonZero. 2024. Starky. https://github.com/0xPolygonZero/
plonky2/tree/main/starky.
[53] PolymerDAO. 2022. plonky2-sha256. https://github.com/polymerdao/
plonky2-sha256.
[54] Side Protocol. 2024. plonky2-gpu. https://github.com/sideprotocol/
plonky2-gpu.
[55] Divya Praneetha Ravipati, Rajesh Kedia, Victor M. Van Santen, Jörg
Henkel, Preeti Ranjan Panda, and Hussam Amrouch. 2022. FN-CACTI:
Advanced CACTI for FinFET and NC-FinFET Technologies. IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems (2022).
[56] Andy Ray, Benjamin Devlin, Fu Yong Quah, and Rahul Yesantharao.
2024. Hardcaml MSM: A High-Performance Split CPU-FPGA MultiScalar Multiplication Engine. In ACM/SIGDA International Symposium
on Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA).
[57] Erik Rybakken, Leona Hioki, and Mario Yaksetig. 2023. Intmax2:
A ZK-Rollup with Minimal Onchain Data and Computation Costs

1116

UniZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof . . .

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
[65] Cheng Wang and Mingyu Gao. 2023. SAM: A Scalable Accelerator for
Number Theoretic Transform Using Multi-Dimensional Decomposition. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design
(ICCAD).
[66] Worldcoin. 2023. awesome-zkml. https://github.com/worldcoin/
awesome-zkml.
[67] Worldcoin. 2023. proto-neural-zkp. https://github.com/worldcoin/
proto-neural-zkp.
[68] Howard Wu, Wenting Zheng, Alessandro Chiesa, Raluca Ada Popa,
and Ion Stoica. 2018. DIZK: A Distributed Zero Knowledge Proof
System. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security).
[69] Charles. F. Xavier. 2022. PipeMSM: Hardware Acceleration for MultiScalar Multiplication. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/999.
[70] Tiancheng Xie, Yupeng Zhang, and Dawn Song. 2022. Orion: Zero
Knowledge Proof with Linear Prover Time. In Advances in Cryptology
– CRYPTO.
[71] Hadas Zeilberger, Binyi Chen, and Ben Fisch. 2023. BaseFold: Efficient
Field-Agnostic Polynomial Commitment Schemes from Foldable Codes.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1705.
[72] Ye Zhang, Shuo Wang, Xian Zhang, Jiangbin Dong, Xingzhong Mao,
Fan Long, Cong Wang, Dong Zhou, Mingyu Gao, and Guangyu Sun.
2021. PipeZK: Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proof with a Pipelined
Architecture. In 48th ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[73] Baoze Zhao, Wenjin Huang, Tianrui Li, and Yihua Huang. 2023.
BSTMSM: A High-Performance FPGA-Based Multi-Scalar Multiplication Hardware Accelerator. In International Conference on Field Programmable Technology (FPT).

Featuring Decentralized Aggregators. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2023/1082.
[58] Ananda Samajdar, Yuhao Zhu, Paul N. Whatmough, Matthew Mattina,
and Tushar Krishna. 2018. SCALE-Sim: Systolic CNN Accelerator.
CoRR (2018). arXiv:1811.02883
[59] Nikola Samardzic, Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar Krastev, Srinivas Devadas, Ronald Dreslinski, Christopher Peikert, and Daniel Sanchez.
2021. F1: A Fast and Programmable Accelerator for Fully Homomorphic Encryption. In 54th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[60] Nikola Samardzic, Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar Krastev, Nathan
Manohar, Nicholas Genise, Srinivas Devadas, Karim Eldefrawy, Chris
Peikert, and Daniel Sanchez. 2022. CraterLake: A Hardware Accelerator for Efficient Unbounded Computation on Encrypted Data. In 49th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[61] Nikola Samardzic, Simon Langowski, Srinivas Devadas, and Daniel
Sanchez. 2024. Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proofs Through
Hardware-Algorithm Co-Design. In 57th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[62] Srinath Setty. 2020. Spartan: Efficient and General-Purpose zkSNARKs
without Trusted Setup. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO.
[63] Guan Shen, Jieru Zhao, Quan Chen, Jingwen Leng, Chao Li, and Minyi
Guo. 2022. SALO: An Efficient Spatial Accelerator Enabling Hybrid
Sparse Attention Mechanisms for Long Sequences. In 59th ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC).
[64] StarkWare. 2021. ethSTARK Documentation. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Paper 2021/582.

1117

