Virtuoso: Enabling Fast and Accurate
Virtual Memory Research via an Imitation-based
Operating System Simulation Methodology

arXiv:2403.04635v2 [cs.AR] 27 Mar 2025

Konstantinos Kanellopoulos1
Konstantinos Sgouras1
F. Nisa Bostanci1
1
1
Andreas Kosmas Kakolyris
Berkin Kerim Konar
Rahul Bera1
Mohammad Sadrosadati1
Rakesh Kumar 2
Nandita Vijaykumar 3
Onur Mutlu1
1 ETH Zürich

2 Norwegian University of Science and Technology

3 University of Toronto

simulation time overhead of only 20%, on top of four baseline
architectural simulators. The source code of Virtuoso is freely
available at https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/Virtuoso.

Abstract
The unprecedented growth in data demand from emerging
applications has turned virtual memory (VM) into a major
performance bottleneck. VM’s overheads are expected to
persist as memory requirements continue to increase. Researchers explore new hardware/OS co-designs to optimize
VM across diverse applications and systems. To evaluate
such designs, researchers rely on various simulation methodologies to model VM components. Unfortunately, current
simulation tools (i) either lack the desired accuracy in modeling VM’s software components or (ii) are too slow and
complex to prototype and evaluate schemes that span across
the hardware/software boundary.
We introduce Virtuoso, a new simulation framework that
enables quick and accurate prototyping and evaluation of
the software and hardware components of the VM subsystem.
The key idea of Virtuoso is to employ a lightweight userspace
OS kernel, called MimicOS, that (i) accelerates simulation
time by imitating only the desired kernel functionalities, (ii)
facilitates the development of new OS routines that imitate
real ones, using an accessible high-level programming interface, (iii) enables accurate and flexible evaluation of the
application- and system-level implications of VM after integrating Virtuoso to a desired architectural simulator.
In this work, we integrate Virtuoso into five diverse architectural simulators, each specializing in different aspects
of system design, and heavily enrich it with multiple stateof-the-art VM schemes. This way, we establish a common
ground for researchers to evaluate current VM designs and
to develop and test new ones. We demonstrate Virtuoso’s
flexibility and versatility by evaluating five diverse use cases,
yielding new insights into state-of-the-art VM techniques.
Our validation shows that Virtuoso ported on top of Sniper,
a state-of-the-art microarchitectural simulator, models (i) the
memory management unit of a real high-end server-grade
CPU with 82% accuracy, and (ii) the page fault latency of a
real Linux kernel with up to 79% accuracy. Consequently, Virtuoso models the IPC performance of a real high-end servergrade CPU with 21% higher accuracy than the baseline version of Sniper. Virtuoso’s accuracy benefits incur an average

1

Introduction

Virtual memory (VM) [1–23] is a cornerstone of modern
computing systems, enabling application-transparent physical memory management, isolation and data sharing. Contemporary applications (e.g., [24–45]) exhibit different characteristics that stress the VM subsystem. We classify these
workloads into two broad categories: (i) long-running workloads (i.e., execution time larger than 100s of seconds) [24, 28–
31, 33–35] with large data footprints and irregular memory
access patterns, that exhibit high address translation overheads, and (ii) short-running workloads (i.e., execution time
often lower than 1 second) [36–45] whose execution time
does not amortize the overheads of system software operations (e.g., physical memory allocation). Multiple prior works
and industrial studies [46–57] have shown that address translation in long-running workloads and memory allocation
in short-running workloads respectively account for up to
40% and 95% of the total execution time. As memory requirements continue to increase and systems transition to
larger physical address spaces [58] (e.g., via hybrid memory
systems with high-capacity non-volatile memories [59–64],
memory disaggregation [65–94]), the overheads associated
with VM operations are expected to increase.
To tackle these overheads, many research works take a
hardware/OS co-design approach and revisit core aspects
of VM such as page table structure [54, 95–103], virtualto-physical mapping [104–111], physical memory allocation
policy (e.g. transparent huge page mechanisms [112–116, 116,
117]) and Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) design [13, 118–
125]. Evaluating such VM designs is not straightforward. The
evaluation challenge primarily arises from the need to model
the interplay between both the OS and HW components
involved in VM. For example, in modern systems, the OS
manages the allocation of large pages, which directly affects
the effectiveness of the TLB [126–128], memory footprint

1

of the page table (PT), PT walk latency [97, 98, 103] and latency of page faults [42, 104, 112, 113, 129, 130]. Given this
complex interplay, evaluating the strengths and weaknesses
of existing and future VM designs becomes a challenging
task without a comprehensive and robust simulation infrastructure.
Unfortunately, modern simulators are either (i) designed
for different purposes (e.g., mainly focus on core microarchitecture [131–135]) and thus lack the ability and flexibility to
accurately model the impact of the OS components involved
in the VM subsystem (e.g. Sniper [133]) or (ii) are relatively
slow and hard-to-develop (e.g., gem5 full-system execution
mode [136]), which hinders rapid design space exploration.
This dichotomy of simulators creates a significant gap in the
field, compelling researchers to invest considerable time and
effort in developing new custom tools or methodologies for
each VM proposal [54, 101, 108, 127–129, 137–141].
Existing Simulation Methodologies. Many simulators
(e.g., [131–136, 142–145]) are primarily designed to focus
on and model microarchitectural CPU features. These simulators emulate basic OS functionalities and use simplified
methods to estimate the implications of OS routines on performance. We classify these simulators as emulation-based.
Emulation-based simulators often employ first-order approximations (e.g., fixed latencies) for OS routines and VM operations. As we show in §2, fixed latencies can lead to inaccurate
estimation of VM overheads, which display high variability
across diverse workloads and system states. Hence, these simulators are not suitable for (and are not primarily designed
to be used for) the evaluation of new VM designs that rely on
hardware/OS co-design. On the other hand, full-system simulators like gem5 [136] and QFlex [146] allow for detailed
simulation of the entire OS, supporting realistic memory
management for evaluating new VM architectures. However,
such simulators suffer from significant drawbacks, including (i) low simulation speed, (ii) high memory consumption
overhead, and (iii) substantial development effort. These
drawbacks impede rapid prototyping of new VM schemes
that rely on HW/OS co-design.
As we show in Table 1, our goal in this work, is to design a simulation framework that (i) maintains the speed
of emulation-based simulators while reaching the accuracy
of full-system simulators and (ii) enables researchers to easily develop and evaluate new VM schemes. To this end, we
present Virtuoso, a new simulation framework that enables
fast and accurate prototyping and evaluation of the software
and hardware components of the VM subsystem. The key
idea of Virtuoso is to employ a lightweight userspace kernel, written in a high level language (e.g., C++ [147]), that
enables researchers to (i) isolate the functionality of only the
desired kernel code (e.g., Transparent Huge Pages [114, 115])
to speed up simulation time, (ii) easily develop new OS routines (e.g., a modified physical memory allocator [112, 113,
117, 129]) without being kernel experts, and (iii) accurately

evaluate the application- and system-level implications of the
OS by integrating Virtuoso into an architectural simulator.
Simulator-Type
Emulation-based
Full-system

OS
N/A
Realistic

Speed
Fast
Slow

Accuracy
Low
Very High

Development Effort
Low
High

Our methodology

Imitation

Fast

High

Low

Table 1. Comparison of existing VM simulation methodologies versus our proposed methodology for VM research.
Our proposed methodology involves dynamically instrumenting a userspace kernel that operates as a standalone
program and communicates with an architectural simulator
via two distinct channels: a functional channel and an instruction stream channel. The functional channel uses shared
memory primitives and specialized ISA instructions to enable
message exchanges between the kernel and the simulator for
functional events (e.g., interrupts). For instance, when the
simulator triggers a page fault, it communicates this event
to the kernel. The kernel then handles the fault and reports
the outcome back to the simulator using the shared memory region. Using the instruction stream channel, the kernel
injects dynamically instrumented instruction streams (e.g.,
page fault handler instructions) into the simulator, enabling
the simulator to accurately model the overheads introduced
by OS routines (e.g additional latency, memory interference).
Using this methodology we build MimicOS, a lightweight
userspace kernel written in C++ [147] that imitates, but is
not limited to, the basic memory management functionality
of the Linux kernel [148]. MimicOS is portable and can be
easily attached to the memory model of an architectural
simulator (see §6.2). In this work, we integrate MimicOS with
five architectural simulators, Sniper [133], ChampSim [132],
Ramulator2 [142, 149], gem5-SE [136] and an SSD simulator,
MQSim [150]. Using MimicOS and Sniper as a baseline, we
build VirTool, a comprehensive toolset that contains both
the HW and SW components that are required to evaluate
many state-of-the-art VM schemes. By doing so, we aim to (i)
unlock a wide range of new case studies ranging from lowlevel microarchitectural VM schemes to system softwarelevel ones, and (ii) establish a common ground for researchers
to evaluate current VM designs and to develop and test new
ones. Table 2 provides a comprehensive overview of existing
techniques that are included in VirTool.
Validation & Comparison. We validate the accuracy
of MimicOS+Sniper against a real high-end server-grade
processor (see §7.2) and demonstrate four key results. First,
MimicOS+Sniper estimates the average L2 TLB misses per
kilo instructions and PT walk latency, respectively, with 82%
and 85% accuracy compared to the real system. Second, MimicOS+Sniper estimates the page fault latency with 66% (up
to 79%) accuracy compared to the page fault latency measured by the Linux kernel running on a real machine. Third,

2

MimicOS+Sniper improves instructions per cycle (IPC) performance estimation accuracy by 21% (from 66% to 80%)
while incurring 35% simulation time overhead compared to
baseline Sniper. Fourth, MimicOS incurs only 20% simulation time overhead, averaged across four simulators, while
enabling the full-system execution mode in gem5 leads to
77% simulation time overhead compared to gem5’s system
call emulation mode.
Versatility & Use Cases. To illustrate the versatility of
Virtuoso, we conduct five case studies that are time-consuming and difficult to assess accurately and rapidly using
existing simulation tools. First, we analyze the performance
of four different page table designs [54, 97] and draw key
insights about their impact on page table walk latency, minor
page fault latency and main memory interference (see §7.4).
Second, we evaluate the overheads associated with different
physical memory allocation policies across large language
model inference workloads (see §7.5). Third, we draw key
insights about the architectural trade-offs of restricting the
virtual-to-physical address mapping across physical memory [105] (see §7.6.1). Fourth, we evaluate the benefits of
contiguity-aware address translation [151] across different
memory fragmentation levels (see §7.6.2). Fifth, we analyze
the implications of employing an intermediate address space
scheme [111] across workloads with different memory allocation patterns (see §7.6.3).
In this work, we make the following contributions:

2

Background & Motivation

VM Overheads. Reducing the overheads of the VM subsystem is a long-standing challenge in computer architecture and OS research. Lately, emerging data-intensive workloads [24–35] turned VM overheads into a major performance bottleneck. As shown in multiple academic and industrial studies [46–57], address translation can significantly
degrade the performance of applications taking up to 40% of
the total execution time [50, 51]. At the same time, OS routines responsible for allocating physical memory can cause
high performance overheads, up to 95% [42, 130, 152].
Figure 1 shows the portion of the total execution time
spent on address translation and allocating physical memory 1 for long-running (i.e., > 100 s) and short-running (i.e.,
< 1 s) workloads executed in a real high-end server-grade
system (our evaluation methodology is described in detail
in §7.1). We make two key observations. First, long-running
workloads spend on average 25% (4.9%) of the total execution
time on address translation (memory allocation). In contrast,
in short-running workloads the overheads of memory allocation take a large portion of the total execution time, i.e.,
32% on average, while the overheads of address translation
are very small, i.e., less than 1% on average. This is because
in long-running workloads, the overheads of physical memory allocation tend to be amortized over time, whereas in
short-running workloads they are not. We conclude that the
overheads of the VM subsystem can vary across different
workloads and can heavily affect performance.
100

Physical Memory Allocation
80

Address Translation

60
40
20

Long Running

GMEAN

2D-Sum

3D Transp

Hadamard

Bagel

Mistral

DB

Llama

WCNT

AES

IMG-RES

JSON

GMEAN

XS

RND

TC

PR

SSSP

GC

CC

KCORE

BC

0
BFS

Fraction of total execution time (%)

• We propose Virtuoso, a new simulation framework
that employs a new imitation-based OS simulation
methodology. Virtuoso enables fast and accurate prototyping and evaluation of the hardware and software
components of the virtual memory (VM) subsystem.
• We integrate our new methodology with five diverse
architectural simulators and implement a comprehensive set of state-of-the-art VM techniques to provide
a common ground for researchers to evaluate current
and new VM designs.
• We validate Virtuoso against a real CPU system and
demonstrate that it improves the accuracy of a state-ofthe-art emulation-based simulator with only a modest
increase in simulation time. We demonstrate that Virtuoso can bridge the gap between emulation-based and
full-system simulators enabling accurate exploration
of VM designs at a fast and flexible way.
• We illustrate the versatility of Virtuoso, by conducting
five case studies that are time-consuming and difficult to accurately and rapidly assess using existing
simulation tools.
• Virtuoso’s source code and integration with all five
simulators is freely available at https://github.com/
CMU-SAFARI/Virtuoso.

Short Running

Figure 1. Fraction of total execution time spent in address
translation and physical memory allocation in long-running
and short-running workloads executed on a real high-end
server system [153].
The increasingly data-intensive nature of emerging applications and the transition towards large physical address
spaces [58] (e.g., via compute-enabled memory modules [99,
154–158], large hybrid memory hierarchies [59–64], memory
disaggregation [65–94], heterogeneous systems with unified
virtual memory [159, 160]) is expected to increase the overheads caused by the VM subsystem [51, 70].
1We consider physical memory allocation as the total time spent in the
page fault handler. We populate the page cache before the application starts
executing to demonstrate the overheads of the page fault handler even in
the absence of long-latency major page faults (i.e., disk accesses).

3

Hardware/OS Co-Design. A promising way to alleviate the overheads of VM is to co-design the hardware and
OS. As shown in multiple prior works, VM can be improved
via (i) designing more efficient page tables [54, 96, 97, 161,
162] (e.g., hash-based page tables [54, 97, 161]), (ii) enforcing and leveraging contiguity between virtual and physical
addresses to increase the address translation reach of the
processor [46, 50, 113, 128, 129, 151, 163–165] (e.g., rangebased translation [151]), (iii) employing hash-based virtualto-physical mappings to reduce the size of metadata used
for address translation [105, 107, 109], (iv) introducing intermediate address spaces [106, 110, 111, 166] to delay address
translation until a main memory access, (v) employing large
OS-managed TLBs [118, 167] to improve the TLB hit rate, and
(vi) accelerating OS routines that manage the VM subsystem
by offloading them to specialized hardware [42, 130, 152].
Need for Detailed Simulation. Given the large VM overheads, it is critical to have methods for easily and quickly prototyping and evaluating existing and new VM ideas and techniques. However, such an evaluation is challenging since VM
components (i) span across the hardware/software boundary, and (ii) are highly interdependent, which leads to significant variability in the overheads of the VM components
across different workloads and system states. For example,
the effectiveness of TLBs [128, 164] as well as the storage
requirements, lookup latency and main memory contention
caused by the page table heavily depend on the number of
large pages (e.g., 2MB pages) that the OS’s physical memory
allocator provides to user applications. At the same time, the
physical memory allocation policy affects the latency of the
page fault handler which might heavily affect the tail latency
of the application. Therefore, it is challenging to accurately
model the overheads of the VM components with simple
first-order models (e.g., those that assume a fixed latency).
We use two example cases to showcase the variability in the
overheads caused by the VM components.
Example: Variation of Minor Page Fault Latency.
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of the minor page fault (MPF) latency using two OS page allocation policies, (i.e., transparent
huge pages (THP) [114, 115] enabled and disabled) across all
workloads executed in a real high-end server-grade system
(§7.1). We make two key observations. First, the latency of
MPFs can vary significantly given a single physical memory allocation policy. With THP-enabled, the average MPF
latency is 2.2𝜇s while the standard deviation is larger than
50𝜇s. Second, the distribution of the PF latency can significantly change when the physical memory allocation policy
provides large pages. With THP-enabled, the contribution of
the outliers (i.e., MPFs with latency larger than 10𝜇s) to the
total MPF latency is 67% while with THP-disabled, the contribution of the outliers to the total PF latency 25.5%. Prior
works (e.g., [176, 177]) attribute this variability to the large
number of different operations (e.g., page zeroing, fallback

mechanism, huge page allocation, page table updates, memory reclamation) and pathological cases that might occur
during page fault handling.
Contribution of outliers to total minor page fault latency: 67%
THP
Enabled
Median

Contribution of outliers to total minor page fault latency: 25%
THP
Disabled
25th
percentile

75th
percentile

Minor Page Fault Latency (µs) in Log Scale

Average PTW
Latency (cycles)

Figure 2. Minor page fault latency distribution across two
different physical memory allocation policies (i.e., THP [114,
115] enabled and disabled) measured in a real system [153].

200
160
120

Low Memory Intensity

SSSP Graph
Application

Ι/Ο stressor

80
40
0

High Memory Intensity
53 Benchmarks with Varying Memory Intensity Levels

Figure 3. Average PTW latency across 53 different applications that exhibit varying levels of memory intensity, measured in a real high-end server system [153].
Example: Variation of Page Table Walk (PTW) Latency. Fig. 3 shows the average PTW latency across 45 applications executed in a real system that stress VM at different
levels2 We observe that the PTW latency significantly varies
across different applications. For example, the PTW of an
application that performs large I/O allocations is 39 cycles
while the PTW latency of the single-source shortest path
workload (SSSP) from GraphBig [33] is larger than 180 cycles.
We conclude that the overhead of the VM subsystem significantly varies across different workloads and system configurations and thus, cannot be accurately modeled with
first-order approximations (e.g., assuming fixed latencies)
but requires detailed simulation.
2.1

Existing Simulation Frameworks

We classify existing simulators (e.g., [131, 133–136, 143, 146,
149, 168]) into two broad categories: (i) simulators that emulate OS routines, and (ii) full-system simulators where a
real full-blown OS is executed on top of a hardware simulator. Unfortunately, as we describe below, neither type of
simulator is well-suited for evaluating VM schemes that rely
on co-designing OS routines and hardware support, which
hinders fast and accurate protyping and evaluation of such
2We use different configurations of the stress-ng benchmarks [178]
and the long-running workloads described in §7.1. We measure the page
table walk latency using performance counters.

4

schemes. Table 2 summarizes the VM components supported
by eleven existing simulators and by our proposed simulator,
Virtuoso.
Emulating OS Routines. Many existing simulators
(e.g., [131–136, 142–145]) are designed with a focus on accurately modeling the core, main memory or other hardware
components that do not directly rely on or interact with the
OS. Hence, these simulators lack (and some do not need for
the use cases they are designed for) a methodology to accurately model the implications (e.g., latency, memory interference) of the OS components involved in the VM subsystem.
For example, multiple simulators (e.g., [132, 133, 143]) model
only the functional interactions of the application with a
subset of OS routines (e.g., mmap() [179]) and typically use
first-order approximations (e.g. Sniper [133] uses a fixed
PTW latency and Champsim [132] uses a fixed page fault latency) to model VM overheads. However, as we show in Fig. 2
and Fig. 3, the overheads of VM can significantly vary across
different workloads and applications, and hence, cannot be
accurately modeled with static first-order approximations.
In §7.2, we show that the baseline version of Sniper that uses
a fixed PTW latency leads to 35% error in IPC estimation
compared to the real system. Thus, such simulators are not a
good fit for evaluating new VM schemes that require changes
to the OS kernel code and new hardware support.
Full-System Simulation. Full system simulators
(e.g., [136, 146, 168, 180–183]) like the full-system execution
mode provided by gem5 [136] and QEMU-based architectural simulators like QFlex [146] enable the execution of a

full-blown OS, including realistic memory management and
other OS routines, on top of a hardware simulator. Such
a methodology is particularly valuable when evaluating
VM designs that involve changes to the OS kernel code
and require new hardware support. However, existing
full-system simulation methodologies have three main
limitations: (i) low simulation speed, (ii) high memory
overheads, and (iii) high development time and effort.
First, simulating a full-blown OS drastically increases
simulation time and memory consumption, hindering
rapid design space exploration. Simulating every single
OS routine without the possibility of omitting those that
are irrelevant to the desired evaluation can significantly
increase simulation times. At the same time, spawning a
full-blown OS significantly increases memory consumption
per simulation task. In §7.3, we show that simulating a
full-blown OS on top of gem5 [136] can increase simulation
time by 77% and memory consumption by 1.69x (from 1GB
to 1.69GB per simulation task) compared to the system call
emulation mode of gem5 (gem5-SE). Second, evaluating
new hardware/OS co-design schemes on top of full-system
simulators necessitates (i) the modification of an already
complex OS kernel code, (ii) its functional verification of top
of simulated hardware and (iii) simulator extensions to support new hardware components (e.g., new TLB designs), and
(iv) complex modifications to the interface between the OS
routines and the hardware. This process requires significant
development effort and time, especially for researchers who
are not experts in OS development. We conclude that, while

Table 2. Virtual memory schemes supported by existing simulators and Virtuoso (our proposed simulator).

Full
System

Emulation-based

Type

Simulator/
Component

TLB
Hierarchy

Page Table
Design

Contiguity
Schemes

Intermediate
Address Space

Hash-based
Translation

Memory
Tagging

SimpleScalar [134]
Multi2Sim [135]

Generic TLB Controller

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

Generic TLB Controller

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

Scarab [131]

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

Ramulator2 [142]

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

ZSim [143]

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

gem5-SE [136]

Generic TLB Controller

x86-64 & ARM PT

✗

✗

✗

✗

ChampSim [132]

Generic & TLB Prefetching

x86-64 PT

✗

✗

✗

✗

Sniper [133]

Generic TLB Controller

Fixed PTW latency

✗

✗

✗

✗

PTLsim [168]

Generic TLB Controller

x86-64 & ARM PT

Linux THP [114, 115]

✗

✗

✗
✗

QFlex [146]

Generic TLB Controller

x86-64 & ARM PT

Linux THP [114, 115]

✗

✗

Gem5-FS [136]

Generic TLB Controller

x86-64 & ARM PT

Linux THP [114, 115]

✗

✗

✗

Midgard [111]

Hash-based
translation
[109]

Mondrian
Data
Protection
[169]

Virtual Block
Interface [106]

Hybrid
Restrictive &
Flexible
Physical
Segments [105]

Expressive
Memory
[171]

Imitation-based

Configurable TLB hierarchy
Multi-page size TLBs
Page-size prediction [127]
Virtuoso
(this work)

TLB prefetching [170]
Software-managed TLBs [118]
TLB entries stored
in data caches [175]

Hash-based PTs:
ECH [97], HDC [54]

Direct Segments [108]

Configurable
Radix-PT +
PWCs [48]

Range Translation &
Eager Paging [151]

Support for nested
TLB [172] and
PTW [173]

5

Linux-like [114, 115]
& Reservation-based
THP [174]

full-system simulators are indispensable tools in computer
architecture research, they limit productivity and cause
high simulation overheads, thereby hindering their practical
utility in exploring and evaluating VM schemes that span
across the hardware/software boundary.
Simulation Requirements. To evaluate new VM schemes
accurately, efficiently and rapidly, a simulation framework
needs to (i) enable fast prototyping of the required hardware
and OS modifications, (ii) accurately and quickly estimate
the overheads caused and the benefits provided by the new
OS and hardware components, (iii) model the interaction of
the VM components with the rest of the system and between
each other.

3

OS Modules

Virtuoso’s MimicOS: Lightweight Userspace Kernel
+ Fast Simulation
+ Quick Development
+ OS Emulation

Page Fault
Handler
3

Instrumentation Tool 4
Inject
disassembled
instructions

Restart PTW 6

Communication Interface

Functional
7
Channel

Architectural Simulator

2

Instruction
Stream
Channel

Communication Interface

Core Model

Memory Model

+ Detailed OS Overhead Evaluation

Page fault 1
5

Userspace Kernel Instructions

Figure 4. Overview of Virtuoso’s Architecture.
4.1

Lightweight Userspace Kernel

Virtuoso employs a lightweight userspace kernel to imitate
the functionality of the desired OS kernel code. Such a design
decision enables researchers to (i) simulate only the relevant
OS routines to speed up simulation time, and (ii) quickly and
easily develop new OS modules.
Kernel Module Selection. Virtuoso’s kernel comprises different modules selected by the researcher to balance accuracy
and simulation time depending on their research needs. For
example, a kernel may solely comprise of a page fault handler if the researcher wants to quickly evaluate the impact
of different page fault handling mechanisms on system performance without taking irrelevant OS routines (e.g., thread
scheduler) into consideration. As we demonstrate in §7.3,
executing a simulator paired with a userspace kernel that
faithfully mimics the functionality of only the Linux memory
management subsystem, is 49% faster than simulating the
entire Linux kernel.
Ease of Development. The userspace kernel can be written in a high-level language (e.g., Python, C++), which enables easier development of new OS routines without requiring expert knowledge. For example, the researcher can
easily develop a new machine learning-based page replacement algorithm using a high-level library (e.g., mlpack [184],
TensorFlow [185], PyTorch [186]) and integrate it with the
kernel without needing to understand or modify the complex
code of a production-grade OS. At the same time, Virtuoso’s
modular design allows increasing the number of supported
OS modules to closely mimic the functionality of a target
kernel at the cost of increased simulation time.

Virtuoso: Overview

We present Virtuoso, a new simulation framework that enables fast and accurate prototyping and evaluation of the
software and hardware components of the VM subsystem. The
key idea of Virtuoso is to employ a lightweight userspace
kernel, written in a high level language (e.g., C++), that enables researchers to (i) isolate the functionality of only the
desired kernel code to speed up simulation time, (ii) easily
develop new OS routines using a high-level language without being kernel code experts, and (iii) accurately evaluate
the application- and system-level implications of the OS by
integrating Virtuoso into an architectural simulator.
Figure 4 illustrates a high-level overview of Virtuoso’s
components and workflow. Virtuoso consists of two main
components: (i) a lightweight userspace kernel, called MimicOS, that imitates the virtual memory subsystem of the OS,
and (ii) a communication channel between MimicOS and
the architectural simulator that Virtuoso is coupled with.
When the architectural simulator executes an event that
requires OS intervention (e.g., page fault, memory allocation, etc.) 1 , the simulator forwards the event to MimicOS
through the communication channel 2 . MimicOS processes
the event 3 and Virtuoso performs two operations. First,
Virtuoso dynamically instruments MimicOS’s binary 4 and
injects MimicOS’s disassembled instructions into the processor performance model of the simulator 5 . This way, the
simulator can accurately estimate the performance implications of the executed OS routines on the application. Second,
when MimicOS resolves the event, it returns the functional
response to the architectural simulator (e.g., signals the core
to restart walking the page table 6 ) through the functional
channel 7 .

4.2

Interface with the Architectural Simulator

To evaluate the impact of OS routines on the performance of
a system, the userspace kernel needs to execute on top of an
architectural simulator. To achieve this, Virtuoso (i) executes
both processes (i.e., the userspace kernel and the simulator)
as standalone applications and (ii) establishes a new communication interface between the userspace kernel and the
simulator that consists of two new communication channels
that employ synchronization primitives to orchestrate the
execution flow between the kernel and the simulator.

4 Imitation-Based Simulation Methodology
We describe the key components of Virtuoso’s simulation
methodology, (i) the lightweight userspace kernel and (ii)
the communication interface between the kernel and the
architectural simulator, and provide a step-by-step example
of the simulation flow of a page fault handling routine.

6

Communication Channels. Virtuoso establishes two communication channels between the kernel and the simulator:
(i) a functional and (ii) an instruction stream channel. Through
the functional channel, the simulator communicates functional requests (e.g., page fault requests) to the kernel and
the kernel communicates the emulated result of the request
back to the simulator (e.g., signal to restart the page table
walk). However, the functional channel is not sufficient to
estimate the impact of the OS routines on the performance of
the system. For example, the architectural simulator cannot
estimate the impact of the page fault handler on various system components (e.g., main memory controller contention)
by using only the functional state (e.g., the physical address
of the new page) of the userspace kernel. To address this
issue, Virtuoso executes the userspace kernel a binary instrumentation tool (e.g., Intel Pin [187], DynamoRIO [188])
to dynamically generate the kernel’s instruction stream (e.g.,
the page fault handler instructions) and communicates it to
the simulator through a separate instruction stream channel.
Synchronization Primitives. To achieve high simulation
speed while maximizing portability (i.e., porting the userspace
kernel to many different architectural simulators with minimal changes), Virtuoso employs (i) POSIX-based [189] shared
memory primitives to exchange messages between the kernel and the architectural simulator, and (ii) magic operations
(e.g., m5ops in gem5 [136], xchg instructions in Sniper [133])
to synchronize the execution of the userspace kernel with
the architectural simulator.3
Execution Flow. When the simulated application causes
an interrupt or a system call, the architectural simulator
performs two actions: (i) writes the interrupt/system call
parameters to the functional channel (i.e., a POSIX-based
shared memory segment [190]) and (ii) notifies the userspace
kernel to read the parameters and start processing the request. While the userspace kernel processes the request, the
binary instrumentation tool produces the instruction stream
of the kernel’s code and sends it to the simulator through
the instruction stream channel. The simulator consumes the
instruction stream, feeds it to its core model, and estimates
the impact of the kernel’s code on performance. The production and the consumption of the kernel’s instruction stream
happen in parallel to avoid unnecessary latency in the simulation.4 When the userspace kernel resolves the request,
it performs two actions: (i) writes the result of the request

to the functional channel and (ii) executes a magic instruction to signal the simulator to continue the simulation of
the application. When the simulator decodes the magic instruction, it pauses the instrumentation of userspace kernel
instructions and switches back the simulated application.
4.3

Multithreaded Userspace Kernel

Virtuoso’s userspace kernel supports multithreading to concurrently handle multiple system calls or interrupts from
different processes. To achieve this, when an application
being executed on the simulator issues a request to the kernel, the kernel spawns a new thread to handle the request
or forwards the request to an available thread. The kernel
uses synchronization primitives to guarantee the correctness of the kernel routines in multithreaded environments
and model the performance overheads of atomic operations.
For example, if multiple applications compete for physical
memory resources, our methodology can capture the corresponding synchronization overheads.
4.4

Simulation Flow: Page Fault Handling Example

Figure 5 demonstrates the workflow of the proposed simulation methodology with an example case study of a page
fault (PF) handler. First, the kernel and the simulator are
launched as userspace processes. In this example, the kernel
comprises a PF handler with multiple different modules 1
(e.g., page table management, page cache [193] management,
etc.). The simulated application is fed to the frontend (i.e., instruction format generator) of the simulator (e.g., trace-based,
instrumentation-based, emulation-based etc.) to generate the
instruction stream 2 . If an instruction contains a load or
store memory operand, the frontend issues a memory access
request to the core model of the simulator 3 . The core model
forwards the memory request to the memory management
unit (MMU) model to perform address translation 4 . If the
MMU does not find the translation in the TLB hierarchy, it
triggers a page table (PT) walk 5 . In this scenario, the PT
walker does not find the translation in the PT and triggers
a PF 6 . Through the functional channel A , the simulator
sends a request to the kernel to handle the PF 7 . The kernel
decodes the message and executes the PF handler code 8 .
The PF handler code is instrumented using a binary instrumentation tool (e.g., Intel Pin [187], DynamoRIO [188]) 9
and the instrumented disassembled instruction stream is sent
to the simulator through the instruction stream channel B .
The PF handler’s instruction stream is forwarded 10 to
the core model of the simulator and the simulator models the
execution of the kernel’s instructions to estimate the impact
of the PF handler on the microarchitectural state and performance (e.g., main memory contention, cache pollution) 11 .
When the PF handler completes executing, the kernel communicates the outcome of the PF (e.g., the physical address
of the new page and the page size) to the simulator 12 . The

3 Magic operations are special instructions that may or not be part of
the ISA and are used to notify the simulator to perform a specific action.
For example, when Sniper [133] decodes the xchg R1,R2 instruction, and
r1 is identical to r2, it treats it as a signal to perform a specific special action
dictated by the content of r1 (e.g, start detailed simulation).
4 The latency for the production of the kernel’s instruction stream could
be hidden by using a runahead thread [191, 192]. Such an optimization is
useful especially when the simulator’s frontend is trace-based and all the
instructions of the application are known in advance.

7

Virtuoso’s Simulation Methodology
Lightweight Userspace Kernel Modules

__do_page_fault()
mov eax, [0xA1]
mov ebx, [0xFA]
9
add eax, ebx
..

B

Instruction Stream
Channel Interface
10

Page Fault Handling

8

do_page_fault(int VA){
pa = alloc();
update_THP_info(VA);
update_page_table(VA);
..
shmem_write(fd,pa);
}

7

Request:
Handle
page fault

A

Simulated Application

Page Table Management
Page Cache

2

1

Simulator Frontend (e.g., trace-based)

Huge Page Policy

Memory
Access

Result: 12
Restart
PT Walk

TLB Hierarchy
Update MMU & Restart PTW

Functional
Channel Interface

5

6

Page Fault

Miss

MMU
Translation
Latency

Page Table Walker

Core Model

+

13

3

4

Translate VA

Architectural
Simulator

Binary
Instrumentation Tool

11

Page Fault Latency

Page Fault Instruction Stream

Figure 5. Example page fault handling workflow of Virtuoso coupled with an architectural
simulator.
11
simulator then re-walks the PT, the core model adds the latency of the PF to the translation latency 13 and forwards
the physical address to the memory hierarchy.

MimicOS: A Lightweight Userspace
Kernel for Memory Management

Using our new imitation-based simulation methodology (§4),
we build MimicOS, a new lightweight kernel written in C++
that mimics, but is not limited to, the basic memory management functionality of the Linux kernel [148] for x86-64
systems [194].
5.1

Page Fault

Not
Found

No

Yes

Page in
HugeTLB?

Update PT

No

Insert 1GB
Mapping

Is page anonymous?

No

1GB page
allocation flags
are on?

Yes

Scan free lists
for 1GB

Yes

Yes

Does VMA have pages in a
No
single backing store?

Yes

Update the 2nD level

Allocate

Is there zero 2MB page?

No

5

Slab

Swap in the
swapped pages

Yes

Scan N pages of the VMA
Swapped-out pages?

Collapse and copy all
4KB pages inside the
2MB region

Search free list
Update PTE

anon?

A

filebacked?

4

No

2MB page is available

Is PTE allocated?

A

Shared pages?

Non-zero PTEs?

Young entries?

4KB device page?

Write-protected PTE?

Swap Cache

6

Index

Page Cache

7

Miss

Access DISK

8

KHugePage Scanning
of each VMA of the process

No available
2MB page

3

Is VMA DAX or
backed by file?
Yes

Is the 2nd level allocated?
No

Yes
(case of mmap/
shmemget upon
explicit request)

PT Frame

Is the 3rd level allocated?

1

1GB Allocation

Error

Yes

No

As shown in Fig. 6, MimicOS employs a memory management scheme that mimics the one used by Linux. On a page
fault, MimicOS checks if the virtual memory area (VMA) [195]
should be stored in hugetlbfs5 [196] 1 and updates the page
table (PT). If not, MimicOS begins walking the PT. To allocate
new PT frames (in case of a page fault), MimicOS requests
new frames from the slab allocator [197] 2 . If the 3rd-level
PT entry is uninstantiated, MimicOS decides whether or not
to allocate a 1GB physical page based on three conditions 3 :
(1) the VMA uses DAX [64] or is backed by a file, (2) 1GB
allocation flags are set, and (3) a 1GB contiguous physical
memory region is available in the buddy allocator’s free list. If
all conditions are met, a 1GB page is allocated, data is fetched
from the page cache (or disk), and the PT is updated. If not,
MimicOS attempts to allocate smaller pages and resumes the
PT walk. For empty 2nd-level PT entries, MimicOS attempts
allocating a 2MB page if the VMA is anonymous [195] 4 .
If a zeroed 2MB page is available, MimicOS allocates it, and
updates the PT. If not, a 4KB page is allocated, the final PT
level updated 5 , and khugepaged [198] is notified to scan
memory and merge 4KB pages into 2MB pages. If the PTE is
allocated and corresponds to anonymous pages, MimicOS

PT Frame

Is the 4th level allocated?

Find Virtual
Memory Area

Mimicking Linux Memory Management

Slab Allocator:
2
Allocate 4KB frame

No

Walk the page table

Yes

5

accesses the swap cache [199] to retrieve the location of the
data in the swap file [200] 6 . If the PTE is empty and corresponds to file-backed pages (e.g., data originates from files),
MimicOS accesses the page cache [193] (software data structure that resides in memory and stores recently-accessed
file-backed pages) to retrieve the data 7 . On a page cache
miss or swap access, MimicOS fetches the data from disk
(we simulate the disk access latency using an SSD simulator [150]) 8 and updates the PT 9 .

Update
PTE 9

Figure 6. MimicOS Memory Management Subsystem.
5.2

VirTool: A Toolset for VM Research

We integrated MimicOS with (i) four architectural simulators: Sniper [133], Ramulator [149], ChampSim [132], and
gem5-SE [136], and (ii) an SSD simulator, MQSim [150], to
enable the evaluation of storage device impact on VM. By
doing so, we aim to unlock a wide range of new ideas and
case studies ranging from low-level microarchitectural VM
schemes to hardware/software/OS co-design VM solutions.
Using MimicOS+Sniper as a baseline, we create VirTool, a
comprehensive toolset of state-of-the-art VM [133]. Table 2

5 hugetlbfs [196] is a Linux kernel policy responsible for reserving huge
pages to ensure availability during allocation time. A virtual memory area
is mapped through hugetlbfs only when large pages are explicitly requested
via mmap() or shmemget() calls.

8

Simulator
ChampSim [132]
Sniper [133]
Ramulator2 [142]
gem5-SE [136]

Frontend

Core model

MMU model

Files

56
46
79
0

45
35
83
221

22
180
44
44

6
9
6
12

in Fig. 7. We use ChampSim [132] as an example trace-based
simulator. First, MimicOS is booted in parallel with ChampSim and runs as a separate process on top of a binary instrumentation tool. ChampSim is modified in two ways: (i) the
MMU model gets attached to MimicOS using a bi-directional
communication channel to receive and send functional requests A and (ii) the core model gets attached to a communication channel to receive MimicOS’s disassembled instruction stream B . When the MMU model encounters a page
fault, it sends a functional request to MimicOS to handle it 1 .
MimicOS starts executing the corresponding handler 3 and
the binary instrumentation tool (e.g., Intel Pin [187]) generates the disassembled instruction stream 4 . The instrumentation tool is modified to generate a trace that follows the
format expected by ChampSim C . The instructions from
MimicOS’s trace 5 are streamed through the communication
channel to ChampSim’s core model 6 , which models their
execution. When the page fault is resolved, MimicOS notifies the MMU to re-walk the page table 7 and ChampSim’s
core model starts fetching instructions from the original
application trace 8 .

Table 3. Additional lines of code and number of files modified in different simulators to integrate Virtuoso.
provides an overview of the techniques included in VirTool.
With VirTool we aim to provide a common ground for researchers to easily and consistently develop and evaluate
existing and new VM techniques.

6

Extending Virtuoso

6.1

Support for Virtualized Environments

Virtuoso supports out-of-the-box simulation of virtualized
execution environments (i.e., virtual machines running on
top of a hypervisor (e.g., [12, 173])). To achieve this, Virtuoso
spawns two userspace kernels (MimicOSes): 1) one that acts
and mimics the hypervisor (e.g., acting like KVM [201]) and
2) one that imitates the guest OS (e.g., Linux). When the
guest OS needs to send requests to the hypervisor, the same
process described in §5.1 is followed in a nested manner, so
that the simulator captures the instruction stream of both
the guest OS and the hypervisor. VirTool already provides
support for nested address translation [173], which is a key
feature for modeling virtualized environments.

1 Handle page fault
3

MimicOS

4

Intel Pin
Tool

C
ChampSim
Trace Format

6.2

Trace-based Simulator

Virtuoso

Integration with Architectural Simulators

At a high level, integrating Virtuoso with an architectural
simulator mainly requires three key steps: (i) using an emulation, instrumentation or other tools (e.g., custom tracer) to
capture the instruction stream generated by MimicOS and
convert it to the format used by the architectural simulator,
(ii) establishing a bi-directional communication channel (e.g.,
POSIX-based shared memory [190]) between MimicOS and
the memory model (e.g., MMU model) of the architectural
simulator to exchange messages (e.g., signals for interrupt,
system call output), (iii) establishing a communication channel between MimicOS and the core model of the architectural
simulator to inject the instruction stream generated by MimicOS. We already integrated Virtuoso with five different simulators: Sniper [133], Ramulator [142, 149], ChampSim [132],
gem5-SE [136] and MQSim [150].
Table 3 shows the additional lines-of-code required for
the integration.
Simulators with Trace-based Frontend. Trace-based
simulators (e.g., [132, 133, 142, 149, 150, 202]) typically simulate workloads using input trace files that represent the
instructions and memory accesses of the workload generated
by instrumentation and emulation tools (e.g., Intel Pin [187])
or other simulators. Virtuoso can be seamlessly integrated
with trace-based simulators by following the steps described

A
7 Restart PTW

B
Load R1,[X]
Load R2,[Y]
Store[Z],R2
EOF

ChampSim

MMU model

Inject MimicOS 6
instructions from trace
5

Core Model
App Trace 8

Figure 7. Integrating Virtuoso with trace-based simulators.
Simulators with Execution-driven Frontend. Execution-driven simulators, such as Sniper [133], Scarab [131] and
ZSim [143], dynamically instrument [187, 188] the simulated
application and generate the instruction stream on-the-fly
without storing a trace file. Such a simulation methodology is particularly useful when the simulator manipulates
the functional model (e.g., simulation of wrong path execution [131, 136, 203, 204]). Virtuoso can be integrated with
these simulators the same way as trace-based simulators
with one key difference: when the instrumentation tool generates MimicOS’s instruction stream, it directly injects it
into the core model of the simulator without the need for
an additional trace file. In this scenario, the core model of
the simulator must be modified to dynamically switch between the instruction stream generated by MimicOS and the
original instruction stream of the workload.
Simulators with Emulation-based Frontend. Simulators with an emulation-based frontend (e.g., gem5 [136],
QFlex [146]) use an emulation tool to capture the instruction
stream of the workload and then feed the instructions to the
core model of the simulator. Integrating Virtuoso with these

9

simulators is straightforward, as the existing emulation tool
can be reused to capture the instruction stream generated
by MimicOS and feed it to the core model of the simulator.
For example, in Virtuoso’s integration with gem5, when the
MMU model encounters a page fault, it sends a request to
MimicOS through shared memory and the emulation tool
produces the instruction stream of MimicOS, feeding it to
the core model of gem5.
6.3

gaps with full-system simulators and enabling the modeling
of more complex OS-level operations.

7

Usage in Heterogeneous System Simulation

Virtuoso can be used to facilitate VM research in heterogeneous systems comprising of accelerators managed by a host
CPU. One such example could be Unified Virtual Memory
(UVM) [159, 160] that enables the use of a shared virtual
address space across GPUs and CPUs. UVM management
operations are typically orchestrated by the device driver
running on the CPU (Host), using an Input-Output Memory
Management Unit (IOMMU) [205]. In this scenario, Virtuoso’s imitation-based methodology can be applied to model
(i) functionalities provided by the OS and the device driver
(e.g. host/device memory allocation, page migration) and (ii)
functionalities of the IOMMU (e.g. page translation). Existing UVM-enabled GPU simulators [206, 207] emulate events
(e.g., page allocation, migration and translation) using fixed
latencies or analytical models. Consequently, integrating Virtuoso into such simulators requires (1) extending MimicOS to
imitate the desired OS components (e.g., UVM driver [208])
and (2) establishing a communication channel between the
host CPU simulator and the accelerator simulator to communicate the corresponding OS-related latency overheads.
6.4

Virtuoso: Validation & Use Cases

We (i) validate Virtuoso’s accuracy against a real high-end
server-grade CPU, (ii) evaluate Virtuoso’s simulation time
overheads when integrated into four different architectural
simulators, and (iii) we conduct five diverse case studies to
demonstrate Virtuoso’s versatility.
7.1 Evaluation Methodology
System Configuration. We use the version of Virtuoso integrated with Sniper [133] as our primary simulation tool.
We chose Sniper for four key reasons: (1) it provides a good
balance between microarchitecture, cache hierarchy, interconnect, main memory modeling details (we heavily refactored and enhanced the baseline DRAM model inspired from
Ramulator [142, 149]) and simulation speed; (2) it is scalable
in multi-core system simulation; (3) it is more programmerfriendly than gem5 [136]; and (4) it achieves higher IPC
performance estimation accuracy over gem5-SE [136], as
shown in prior studies [209] and as we also verified. Table 4 shows the configuration of the baseline simulated system, the configurations of all the schemes we evaluated in
our case studies (§7.4-7.6.3) and the configuration of the
real system we validated Virtuoso against. Virtuoso along
with all scripts, benchmarks, integration with five simulators
and all techniques included in VirTool, is freely available at
https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/Virtuoso.
Workloads. Table 5 shows the benchmarks we used to evaluate Virtuoso. We select short-running applications (< 1s)
from various domains including Function-as-a-Service workloads [40, 41], Large Language Model (LLM) inference [37,
38, 217] and image processing [218]. We select long-running
applications with high L2 TLB MPKI (> 5) from the GraphBIG [33], HPCC [31] and XSBench [32] benchmark suites
which are also used by multiple prior works (e.g., [96, 97,
101, 105, 111, 175]).

Current Limitations

We believe that Virtuoso is a good fit for studies focusing
on VM, which spans across the hardware and OS layers of
the system stack. Virtuoso’s speed and accuracy in simulating the Linux memory subsystem and hardware MMU
makes it particularly useful for academic research, system
optimization, and the preliminary testing of hardware/OS
changes before deployment on actual systems. At the same
time, researchers can expand MimicOS to incorporate more
advanced OS functionality and adjust the accuracy and simulation time as per their research requirements. Hence, even
though it provides a viable alternative to full-system simulators, we do not suggest that Virtuoso replaces them but
rather complements them. In many cases, researchers need
to simulate the entire system stack, including a real OS, to
discover previously unknown performance bottlenecks or
to evaluate the performance of a new hardware/OS cooperative technique in production-level OSes. In such cases,
full-system simulators like gem5 [136] can provide a more
accurate simulation of the entire system stack compared to
Virtuoso. As Virtuoso evolves, further development could expand its capabilities, potentially bridging some of its current

7.2

Validation of Virtuoso

IPC Validation. Figure 8 shows the IPC performance estimation accuracy of Virtuoso+Sniper and baseline Sniper
compared to a real system (Table 4) across the long-running
memory intensive workloads that are heavily affected by
address translation. Virtuoso (baseline Sniper) achieves 80%
(66%) average accuracy in IPC estimation compared to the
real system. Virtuoso adapts to the dynamic characteristics
of different workloads and achieves 21% higher accuracy in
IPC estimation versus baseline Sniper which uses a fixed
PTW latency (set as the average PTW latency obtained from
a real system) regardless of the workload characteristics.
Validation of Page Fault (PF) Latency. We compare the PF
latency reported by Virtuoso+Sniper against the page fault

10

Virtuoso+Sniper

Accuracy Virtuoso + Sniper

Accuracy Baseline Sniper

Baseline Sniper

0.4

100%
80%

IPC

0.3

60%

0.2

40%

0.1

20%

0.0

Table 4. Simulation Configuration and Simulated Systems

0%
BC

BFS

CC

KCORE

GC

PR

SSSP

TC

XS

GMEAN

Figure 8. IPC estimation accuracy estimation of Virtuoso+Sniper and baseline Sniper compared to a real system.

Baseline Virtuoso+Sniper Configuration
4-way Out-of-Order x86 2.9 GHz core

Core

Real System

Accuracy

latency measured on the real system. We measure the real
system PF latency at a fine granularity using ftrace and the
handle_mm_fault() function tracer [221]. Figure 9 shows
the cosine similarity [222] of the PF latency reported by Virtuoso and the real system.6 We use the short-running, page

N

um
S

EA
M
G

d

2D

am

an
H

ad

Tr
3D

ar

sp

s
M
LL

-R
G
IM

LRU replacement policy; IP-stride prefetcher [210]

Figure 9. Cosine similarity between the page fault latency
values measured by Virtuoso and the real system.

2 MB, 16-way assoc, 16-cycle latency
SRRIP replacement policy [211]; Stream prefetcher [212]

Data Set

GraphBIG [33]

Betweenness Centrality (BC), Breadth-first search
(BFS) , Connected components (CC), Coloring (GC),
PageRank (PR) , Triangle counting (TC) , Shortestpath (SP), k-Core (KC)

50-100GB
10 GB

Function-as-a-Service

<50MB

Large Language Models

Short-input short-output prompts using Llama
7B [39], Bagel [38] and Mistral [37] on top of
llama.cpp [217]

<2GB

Image Processing

3D Hadamard Product [218], 3D Matrix Transposition [220], 2D Matrix Sum

<2GB

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Sniper+Virtuoso
Virtuoso+Sniper

Accuracy

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

KC

XSBench [32], randacc from GUPS [219]
AES, Image Resizing (IMG-RES), Word count of a
document (WCNT), Database filter query (DB), JSON
deserialization (JS)

Real System

Accuracy

HPC

100
80
60
40
20
0

N

Workload

Accuracy

Suite/Domain

BC

Table 5. Evaluated Workloads

EA

64-entry RLB: 9-cycle, Access in parallel with L2 TLB; Eager
paging allocator with max order of 21; B+ Tree to store ranges

XS

RMM [151]

M

64-entry L1 VLB: 1-cycle latency; 16-entry L2 Range-based VMA
Lookaside Buffer: 4-cycle latency; B+ Tree for VMAs; 2-level
MLB hierarchy; 6-level radix tree for M->P translation

G

Midgard [111]

TC

2 x 8 GB RestSegs: 1 × 4 KB pages and 1 × 2 MB pages; RestSegs:
16-way, SRRIP replacement policy [211]; 1x FlexSeg with 4-level
radix PT; TAR Cache: 8 KB, 2-cycle; SF Cache: 8 KB, 2-cycle

SP

Size: 4 GB; Chain Table; 8 PTEs/entry

Utopia [105]

SS

Size: 4 GB; Open addressing; 8 PTEs/entry

HT [216]

PR

HDC [54]

C

8K-entries/way; 4-way; Hash function: CITY [215] 2-cycle Perfect Cuckoo Walk caches for inter-page walks: 2-cycle

G

ECH [97]

E

4-level tree; 4 KB page table frames; 3-Page Walk Caches (Physical Indexing): 32-entry, 2-way, 2-cycle

R

Simulated Systems Evaluated in Use Cases (§7.4-7.6.3)
Radix
[49, 214]

O

Linux 5.15.0-60 [213]; DDR4-2400 Memory: 256 GB;
CPU: Intel Xeon Gold 6226R 2.90 GHz [153]

C

Real System
(Validation)

fault-bound workloads for which PF latency estimation is
critical. Despite using MimicOS, Virtuoso’s userspace kernel
that imitates only a subset of Linux kernel’s memory management routines (§5.1), the cosine similarity of PF latency
ranges from 60% to 79%, with an average of 66% across all
workloads. We conclude that Virtuoso can approximate the
PF latency with reasonable accuracy, even without modeling
the entire Linux kernel.
Validation of MMU Performance. Figure 10 shows the
L2 TLB misses per kilo instructions (MPKI) and the PTW
latency of Virtuoso+Sniper compared to the real system. For
this experiment, we use the long-running workloads that
are heavily affected by address translation latency and thus
by the effectiveness of the MMU. We observe that Virtuoso estimates the L2 TLB MPKI and the PTW latency with,
on average, 82% and 85% accuracy, respectively. Virtuoso
accurately models the MMU performance of the real system, which is essential for capturing the address translation
overheads in data-intensive workloads.

C

Linux-like THP with 4 KB and 2 MB pages; HugeTLBFS; Swap:
4 GB; Swapping threshold: 90%; Baseline fragmentation: 80%

S

256 GB, DDR4-2400, 𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷 , 𝑡𝐶𝐿 =12.5 ns, 𝑡𝑅𝑃 =2.5 ns

MimicOS

BF

2 MB/core, 16-way assoc, 35-cycle latency

DRAM

L2 TLB MPKI

L3 Cache

PTW Latency

L2 Cache

ES

T
N
C
W

JS

O

L1 I/D-Cache: 32 KB, 8-way assoc, 4-cycle access latency

L1 Cache

B

N

3-Page Walk Caches: 32-entry, 4-way, 2-cycle latency

D

L2 TLB: 2048-entry, 16-way assoc, 12-cycle latency

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
S

L1 D-TLB (4 KB): 64-entry, 4-way assoc, 1-cycle latency; L1
D-TLB (2 MB): 32-entry, 4-way assoc, 1-cycle latency

MMU

AE

Cosine Similarity

L1 I-TLB: 128-entry, 8-way assoc, 1-cycle latency

Figure 10. (Top) L2 TLB MPKI and (Bottom) PTW latency
reported by Virtuoso+Sniper compared to a real system.

6We use the cosine similarity instead of the mean absolute error to

account for the variance and the fluctuations in the PF latency across time.

11

7.3

increases, by a factor of 1.5x on average. We also verify this
trend for gem5-SE and gem5-FS (see extended version [223]).

Simulation Time and Memory Overhead

with MimicOS
80%
60%
40%
20%

2.08

(0.8GB)
2.28
1.02

(1.6GB)
1.69

Normalized
Simulation Time

y=1.5x
10

Sniper

Ramulator

Gem5-SE

30

x
50

40

7.4

Use Case 1: Alternative Page Table Designs

We evaluate different page table (PT) designs to draw insights on the trade-offs between address translation latency,
memory interference and page fault latency. We evaluate
the following designs: (i) Radix: a 4-level radix-based PT design [194] and Linux-like THP enabled [114, 115], (ii) ECH:
elastic cuckoo hash PT design [97], (iii) HDC: 4GB global
open-addressing-based hash PT [54], and (iv) HT: 4GB global
chain-based hash PT [216]. In this use case, we define memory fragmentation as the percentage of free 2MB pages compared to the total number of 2MB pages.
Effect of PT Design on Translation Latency & Memory Interference. Figure 13 shows the reduction in total
PTW latency achieved by ECH, HDC and HT compared to
Radix, across different memory fragmentation levels. We
make two key observations. First, all three hash-based PT
designs consistently reduce the total PTW latency over Radix
across all memory fragmentation levels. Second, the reduction in total PTW latency achieved by all hash-based PT
designs increases with decreasing fragmentation levels. To

20%

1.45
Radix

ChampSim

20

Figure 12. Correlation between the number of instructions
executed by MimicOS and the simulation time overhead.

2%

0%
2.60
2.20
1.80
1.40
1.00

28%

y

Fraction of Instructions Executed by MimicOS

with Full-blown Linux Kernel
77%

35%
13%

2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0

0

Reduction in total PTW
Latency over Radix

Memory Overhead
over Baseline Simulators

Slowdown over
Baseline Simulators

Fig. 11 shows the simulation time and memory consumption
overhead when we integrate MimicOS into Sniper, ChampSim, Ramulator, and gem5-SE compared to their baseline versions and gem5-FS. We report worst-case overheads using
randacc, which incurs the highest number of page faults per
kilo instructions (PFKI) and ultimately frequent MimicOSsimulator communication. We make five key observations.
First, integrating MimicOS increases simulation time by an
average of 20% due to additional simulated instructions.
Second, enabling full-system mode in gem5 leads to a 77%
increase in simulation time compared to gem5’s syscallemulation mode. Third, using MimicOS results in a 1.45x
average increase in memory consumption across all simulators. Fourth, in ChampSim and Sniper, we observe nearly 2.1x
memory overhead since we enable online binary instrumentation for MimicOS. On the contrary, in Ramulator where
we use offline binary instrumentation and in gem5 where we
reuse the existing binary emulation infrastructure, MimicOS
leads to only 1.02x overhead. Last, in terms of raw memory
usage, porting MimicOS to Sniper leads to 0.8GB memory
usage, whereas gem5-FS consumes double (1.6GB), leading
to up to 2x lower simulation job throughput when memory
capacity is limited.

AVG

Figure 11. Simulation time and memory usage overheads of
integrating MimicOS into Sniper, ChampSim, Ramulator and
gem5-SE compared to their baseline versions and gem5-FS.

ECH

HDC

HT

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
100%

98%

96%

94%

92%

90%

Memory Fragmentation Level

Figure 13. Reduction in total PTW latency achieved by hashbased PTs compared to Radix across different memory fragmentation levels.

Correlation Between Simulation Time and Number
of MimicOS Instructions. Figure 12 shows the correlation between the number of MimicOS instructions and the
simulation time overhead when we integrate MimicOS with
Sniper. To perform this analysis, we crafted a microbenchmark where the number of MimicOS instructions is varied
while keeping the total number of simulated instructions constant. We observe a strong correlation between the number
of MimicOS instructions and the simulation time overhead
across all simulation points. As the number of MimicOS
instructions increases, the simulation time overhead also

better understand the effect of PT design on the system, in
Figure 14 we show the total DRAM row buffer conflicts (induced by activating rows that contain either data or page
table entries) of ECH, HDC, and HT compared to Radix. We
observe that ECH increases total DRAM row buffer conflicts
by 52% over Radix while HDC and HT reduce DRAM rowbuffer conflicts by 5% and 7%, respectively. Probing ECH

12

Normalized DRAM
Row Buffer Conflicts

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8

ECH

BC

BFS

HDC

CC

HT

GC

2.5x

KC

PR

RND

region are allocated, and (iv) UT: a Utopia [105] system with
memory segments of different sizes (4MB, 32MB, 512MB)
and associativity (8,16) that employ a restrictive hash-based
virtual-to-physical address mapping.
Figure 16 shows the PF latency distribution across all allocation policies in three LLM inference workloads. We make
three observations. First, THP-based allocators (CR-THP and
AR-THP) show similar median latency to BD but with a
>1000x increase in tail latency. Second, UT-32MB/16-way
achieves the lowest PF latency as it provides large contiguous segments for fast hash-based page allocations. Third, as
we increase the restrictive segment size (e.g., UT-512MB/16way) both the total and tail PF latencies increase compared to
UT-32MB/16-way. This is because, allocating data in a very
large segment limits the spatial locality of the data structure
that stores the allocation metadata (i.e., virtual tags for each
physical page) which in turn increases PF latency.
Obsv. Restricting the virtual-to-physical address mapping
leads to faster page fault handling due to the lightweight hashbased page allocation routine.

2.7x

SP

TC

XS

GMEAN

Figure 14. Normalized DRAM row buffer conflicts for ECH,
HDC and HT over Radix.

Reduction in total MPF
Latency over Radix

ECH

HDC

Page Fault Latency (ns)

during a PTW requires multiple memory accesses (one access for each Cuckoo nest in the hash table), causing high
interference in the main memory.
Effect of PT Design on Minor Page Fault Latency
(MPF). PT design can significantly impact MPF latency due
to differences in PT update or insertion operations. For example, Radix requires up to 4 memory accesses to insert a new
entry, while ECH may require 1 or more depending on load
or insertion order. Figure 15 shows the reduction in total MPF
latency achieved by the hash-based PTs over Radix. We make
two key observations. First, ECH, HDC, and HT respectively
reduce MPF latency by 9%, 18% and 19%, on average across all
workloads. This occurs because hash-based PTs are allocated
(or expanded) with large physical memory chunks compared
to Radix that allocates 4KB frames on-demand. Second, HDC
and HT reduce MPF latency across all workloads, while ECH
increases it in RND due to multiple memory accesses caused
by hash collisions.
Obsv. Although ECH reduces the latency of PTWs, it causes
higher main memory contention and sometimes increases the
latency of MPFs compared to a radix-based baseline.

Total page fault latency
Best performing

Bagel-2.8B

Best performing

Llama-2-7B

Best performing

Mistral-7B

Figure 16. Page fault latency distribution with seven different physical memory allocation policies for three LLM
workloads.

HT

30%

-6%

20%

7.6

10%

We draw insights into how different MMUs affect microarchitectural and system-level metrics. We evaluate the following
designs: (i) Utopia [105]: a system equipped with a 16GBlarge physical memory segment that employs a restrictive
address mapping, (ii) RMM [151]: a system that employs, on
the software side, eager paging to allocate large contiguous
physical segments and, on the hardware side, a range lookaside buffer and range walker to quickly retrieve contiguity
information, (iii) Midgard [111]: a system that employs an
intermediate address space and two-level address translation,
with a frontend that employs two VMA lookaside buffers
and a backend that employs a 4-level radix tree. We define
memory fragmentation based on the underlying design: for
Utopia, we define memory fragmentation as the number of
available 2MB pages, including the contiguous 2MB pages
needed to form the RestSeg, compared to the total number
of 2MB pages. For RMM, we define memory fragmentation
as the ratio of the total size of the top 50 largest unallocated
contiguous segments to the total main memory size. For

0%
BC

BFS

CC

GC

KC

PR

RND

SP

TC

XS

Evaluating Different MMU Designs

GMEAN

Figure 15. Reduction in total minor page fault (MPF) latency
achieved by hash-based PTs compared to Radix.
7.5 Use Case 2: Physical Memory Allocation in LLMs
We examine the effect of different physical memory allocation policies: (i) BD: a buddy allocator that only provides
4KB pages and updates the PT accordingly, (ii) CR-THP:
a conservative reservation-based THP allocator [174] that
reserves a 2MB physical memory region upon the initial
allocation of a 4KB page, and fully upgrades it to a 2MB page
once over 50% of the 4KB pages within that region are allocated, (iii) AR-THP: an aggressive reservation-based THP
allocator [174] that reserves a 2MB physical memory region
upon the initial allocation of a 4KB page, and fully upgrades
it to a 2MB page once over 10% of the 4KB pages within that

13

Midgard, we define memory fragmentation as the number of
2MB pages that are available for allocation for the backend
translation level compared to the total number of 2MB pages.

RestSeg, address translation latency increases, up to 10% for
the largest RestSeg compared to the 8GB RestSeg. This is
because a large RestSeg increases the latency of accessing
address translation metadata (RSW as described in [105]).
Obsv. Selecting the size of a memory segment that enforces a
restrictive VA-to-PA mapping poses a trade-off: larger segments
reduce the frequency of page table walks for data within these
segments, yet they may increase address translation latency.

Breakdown of Latency

Increase in address
translation latency
over 8GB RestSeg

7.6.1 Use Case 3: Intermediate Address Space Schemes
Figure 17 shows the breakdown of address translation latency
in Midgard [111] to understand the effects of frontend and
backend address translation. We make two key observations.
First, most workloads spend less than 20% of the total translation latency in the frontend translation since they use a
small number of large VMAs. Hence, the frontend lookaside
buffers can effectively cache all the VMA information. Second, we observe that BC spends more than 50% of the total
translation latency in the frontend.

32GB

64GB

10%
5%
0%
BC

BFS

CC

GC

KC

PR

RND

SP

TC

XS

GMEAN

100%

Figure 19. Increase in translation latency achieved by increasing the RestSeg size over Utopia with an 8GB RestSeg.

75%
50%
25%

Backend

0%

BC

BFS

CC

Frontend
GC

KC

PR

RND

SP

TC

Effect of Utopia on Swapping Activity. We evaluate the
effect of Utopia on swapping activity using a setup where
Virtuoso is integrated into Sniper [133] and MQSim [150].
In this setup, Utopia is configured with restrictive segments
capturing large portions of main memory (>50%), and we
measure the time spent swapping in/out of memory. When
memory usage exceeds 90%, the system begins swapping
pages to disk. Figure 20 shows the normalized time spent in
swapping for different restrictive segment sizes compared
Radix. We observe that swapping time increases with larger
restrictive segments, reaching up to 203x for the largest size
compared to Radix. This occurs because restrictive segments
cause hash collisions that prevent data from being stored in
memory even in the presence of free space. Thus, careful
selection of restrictive segment size is crucial to minimize
swapping overheads.
Obsv. Enforcing a restrictive hash-based mapping across very
large memory segments leads to increased swapping activity.

XS

Figure 17. Breakdown of translation latency in Midgard.

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Normalized cycles
spent on swapping

To better understand this phenomenon, we investigate the
number and size of virtual memory areas (VMA) [195] involved in BC. As shown in Figure 18, BC uses (i) one VMA occupying 77GB of VA space and (ii) 147 smaller VMAs ranging
from 4KB to 1GB. While the large VMA is efficiently cached
in the frontend VMA lookaside buffers, the 147 smaller VMAs
are not covered efficiently by either the L1 or L2 VMA-LBs
(3% hit ratio in L2 VLB), resulting in high frontend translation
latency. We conclude that Midgard’s frontend design needs
further optimization to handle workloads with many small
VMAs, despite the large VMAs being efficiently cached.
Obsv. Schemes that employ intermediate address spaces can
be further optimized to reduce the frontend translation latency
for workloads with a large number of small VMAs.
Number of VMAs

16GB

15%

77GB

4KB

<128KB <256KB <512KB <1MB

<8MB

<16MB <32 MB <1GB

>1GB

250

203x

200
150
100

1.001x

50
0
50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Fraction of main memory covered by restrictive segment

VMA Size

Figure 20. Time spent in swapping activity for different
restrictive segment sizes (in Utopia), normalized to Radix.

Figure 18. Number of VMAs of different sizes in BC.
7.6.2 Use Case 4: Restricting the VA-to-PA Mapping
We evaluate the effects of the size of the restrictive segment
(RestSeg) in Utopia [105]. Figure 19 shows the increase in
translation latency as we increase the Utopia RestSeg size up
to 64GB compared to Utopia that employs an 8GB RestSeg.
We draw the following insight: as we increase the size of the

7.6.3 Use Case 5: Exploiting Contiguity Information
We further explore the effect of memory fragmentation on
exploiting virtual-to-physical address contiguity to reduce
PTWs as described in RMM [104]. Figure 21 shows the reduction in DRAM row buffer conflicts caused by address

14

Reduction in DRAM row
buffer conflicts over Radix

translation metadata (contiguity information and page table entries) achieved by RMM over Radix, across different
fragmentation levels We observe that even with 94% fragmentation, RMM reduces DRAM row buffer conflicts caused
by address translation metadata by 90% on average over
Radix due to the reduced number of PTWs.
Obsv. Even at mid-to-high memory fragmentation levels, employing contiguity-based schemes significantly reduces DRAM
row buffer conflicts caused by page table accesses.
94%

100%

92%

90%

80%

KC

PR

70%

60%

50%

8.2

Several prior works explore FPGA-based approaches to accelerate system simulation (e.g., [235–240]). FireSim [240]
is an FPGA-accelerated platform that enables fast, cycleexact simulation of large-scale systems, such as server blades.
FAST [236] is a hybrid FPGA-CPU simulator that offloads its
timing model computation on an FPGA while executing the
functional model on a CPU.
FPGA-accelerated simulators come with notable challenges:
(i) porting simulation models to Register-transfer level (RTL)
requires substantial development effort and time, (ii) slow
compilation due to RTL synthesis, and (iii) existing FPGAbased prototypes may not fully represent modern systems
due to constraints such as discrepancies between FPGA and
DRAM operating frequencies. While these simulators provide fast and accurate simulation, they can be impractical
for rapid prototyping (and programming) in fast-evolving
HW/SW environments, such as virtual memory solutions.
Compared to FPGA-accelerated simulators, Virtuoso prioritizes ease of development, use and versatility while providing
relatively high simulation speed and high accuracy.

40%

95%
90%
85%
80%
BFS

CC

GC

RND

SP

TC

XS

GMEAN

Figure 21. Reduction in DRAM row buffer conflicts (caused
by address translation metadata) achieved by RMM, over
Radix, across different memory fragmentation levels.

8

Related Work

To our knowledge, Virtuoso is the first simulator that bridges
the gap between emulation-based and full-system simulators enabling accurate exploration of VM designs in a fast
and flexible way. Various simulators (e.g., [131–136, 136, 142–
146, 168, 180–183]) and simulation methodologies (e.g., [224–
233]) have been developed to model different system components. In §2, we examine the key characteristics of emulationbased and full-system simulators and compare them against
Virtuoso. In this section, we discuss other related simulation
methodologies and provide a broad overview of works that
focus on VM optimizations.
8.1

FPGA-Accelerated Simulation

8.3 Simulating Large-Scale Memory/Storage Systems
Prior works optimize how program values are stored by the
simulator, enabling large-scale memory and storage system
simulation (e.g., [241–243]). David [241] and Exalt [243] employ semantics-aware data representation schemes that lead
to highly-efficient data compression, enabling large-scale
storage simulation. Øsim [242] models large-scale memory
systems on commodity hardware by leveraging the observation that most data-intensive workloads follow similar
control flows, enabling efficient memory compression. Virtuoso can be integrated with these simulators to model real
program values while optimizing memory usage.

First-Order Models

First-order models, combined with instrumentation tools
(e.g., BadgerTrap [233]), are used in prior VM research (e.g., [54,
104, 234]) to approximate VM overheads . These models are
typically analytical (e.g., fixed latency for PTW) which makes
them valuable for quickly estimating the performance impact
of new VM features. However, they overlook critical dynamic
effects arising from hardware and OS interactions, such as
the volume of page table data stored in caches, DRAM contention due to page table accesses, and large page availability
affected by fragmentation. These effects exhibit dynamic behavior and can significantly influence evaluation results.
In contrast, Virtuoso captures both first-order and dynamic effects in VM performance analysis. For instance, as
demonstrated in §7.4, Virtuoso measures first-order metrics
(e.g., page table walk latency, page fault latency) alongside
dynamic effects (e.g., resource contention) of page table design. Thus, Virtuoso serves as an alternative for simulating
hardware/OS interactions at higher detail when necessary.

8.4

Virtual Memory Optimizations

To improve VM, prior works explore several key approaches:
(i) enabling large page sizes (e.g., [116, 126, 140, 234, 244–
255]), (ii) enforcing virtual-to-physical address contiguity to
increase the processor’s address translation reach (e.g., [46,
50, 113, 128, 129, 151, 163–165]), (iii) employing restrictive
virtual-to-physical address mappings (e.g., [105, 107, 109]),
(iv) designing alternative page table structures to reduce PT
walk latency (e.g., [54, 95–103]), (v) employing TLB prefetching (e.g., [125, 138, 170, 256–258]), (vi) optimizing TLB replacement policies (e.g., [259, 260]), (vii) storing TLB entries
in the cache to minimize PT walks (e.g., [167, 175, 261]),
(viii) leveraging hardware support to reduce page fault handling latency (e.g., [42, 130, 152]), (ix) employing hardware
mechanisms to accelerate PT walks (e.g., [48, 262, 263]), (x)
optimizing VM components for efficient address translation

15

in virtualized environments (e.g., [140, 162, 264–267, 267–
270]) and (xi) employing intermediate address spaces to defer address translation (e.g., [106, 110, 111, 166]). Developing
these techniques requires extensive simulation effort at both
the OS and the hardware model levels. Virtuoso provides
a comprehensive toolset of state-of-the-art VM techniques,
offering a common ground that makes it easier to develop
and evaluate existing and new VM solutions.

9

[6] M. Satyanarayanan, Henry H. Mashburn, Puneet Kumar, David C.
Steere, and James J. Kistler. Lightweight Recoverable Virtual Memory.
In SOSP, 1993.
[7] E. Abrossimov, M. Rozier, and M. Shapiro. Generic Virtual Memory
Management for Operating System Kernels. In SOSP, 1989.
[8] Richard W. Carr and John L. Hennessy. WSCLOCK – A Simple and
Effective Algorithm for Virtual Memory Management. In SOSP, 1981.
[9] Ting Yang, Emery D. Berger, Scott F. Kaplan, and J. Eliot B. Moss.
CRAMM: Virtual Memory Support for Garbage-Collected Applications. In OSDI, 2006.
[10] Peter J. Denning. Virtual Memory. In CSUR, 1970.
[11] Thomas Ahearn, Robert Capowski, Neal Christensen, Patrick Gannon,
Arlin Lee, and John Liptay. Virtual Memory System, 1973.
[12] Robert P Goldberg. Survey of Virtual Machine Research. In IEEE
Computer, 1974.
[13] Bruce L. Jacob and Trevor N. Mudge. A Look at Several Memory
Management Units, TLB-Refill Mechanisms, and Page Table Organizations. In ASPLOS, 1998.
[14] A. J. Smith. A Comparative Study of Set Associative Memory Mapping
Algorithms and Their Use for Cache and Main Memory. In IEEE TSE,
1978.
[15] D. A. Wood, S. J. Eggers, G. Gibson, M. D. Hill, and J. M. Pendleton.
An In-Cache Address Translation Mechanism. In ISCA, 1986.
[16] J Bradley Chen, Anita Borg, and Norman P Jouppi. A Simulation
Based Study of TLB Performance. In ISCA, 1992.
[17] Eric J. Koldinger, Jeffrey S. Chase, and Susan J. Eggers. Architecture
Support for Single Address Space Operating Systems. In ASPLOS,
1992.
[18] Anders Lindstrom, John Rosenberg, and Alan Dearle. The Grand
Unified Theory of Address Spaces. In HotOS, 1995.
[19] Bruce Jacob and Trevor Mudge. Virtual Memory in Contemporary
Microprocessors. In IEEE Micro, 1998.
[20] D. R. Engler, S. K. Gupta, and M. F. Kaashoek. AVM: Application-Level
Virtual Memory. In HotOS, 1995.
[21] Jerry Huck and Jim Hays. Architectural Support for Translation Table
Management in Large Address Space Machines. In ISCA, 1993.
[22] Thomas E. Anderson, Henry M. Levy, Brian N. Bershad, and Edward D.
Lazowska. The Interaction of Architecture and Operating System
Design. In ASPLOS, 1991.
[23] F. J. Corbató and V. A. Vyssotsky. Introduction and Overview of the
Multics System. In AFIPS, 1965.
[24] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification
with Graph Convolutional Networks. In ICLR, 2017.
[25] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang,
Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph
Neural Networks: A Review of Methods and Applications. In AI Open,
2020.
[26] Brad Fitzpatrick. Distributed Caching with Memcached. In Linux J.,
2004.
[27] Redis. https://redis.io/.
[28] Graph 500. Graph 500 Large-Scale Benchmarks. http://www.graph500.
org/.
[29] Mikko Rautiainen and Tobias Marschall. GraphAligner: Rapid and
Versatile Sequence-to-Graph Alignment. In Genome Biology, 2020.
[30] Damla Senol Cali, Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Joël Lindegger, Zülal
Bingöl, Gurpreet S. Kalsi, Ziyi Zuo, Can Firtina, Meryem Banu Cavlak,
Jeremie Kim, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Gagandeep Singh, Juan GómezLuna, Nour Almadhoun Alserr, Mohammed Alser, Sreenivas Subramoney, Can Alkan, Saugata Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. SeGraM: A
Universal Hardware Accelerator for Genomic Sequence-to-Graph
and Sequence-to-Sequence Mapping. In ISCA, 2022.
[31] Piotr R. Luszczek, David H. Bailey, Jack J. Dongarra, Jeremy Kepner,
Robert F. Lucas, Rolf Rabenseifner, and Daisuke Takahashi. The HPC
Challenge (HPCC) Benchmark Suite. In SC, 2006.

Conclusion

We introduced Virtuoso, a new simulation methodology that
enables quick and accurate prototyping and evaluation of virtual memory (VM) schemes. Virtuoso’s key idea is to employ
a lightweight userspace kernel written in a high-level language, which comprises of a subset of the OS’s VM-related
functionalities to: (i) accelerate simulation, (ii) simplify the
development of new OS routines, and (iii) accurately evaluate different VM schemes. We integrate Virtuoso with five
architectural simulators and validate it against a real highend server-grade CPU. To showcase Virtuoso’s versatility,
we conduct five case studies demonstrating its applicability
to various VM research areas. Our evaluation demonstrates
that Virtuoso provides a new point in the design space of
simulators that strikes a unique balance between simulation
speed, accuracy, and versatility. We conclude that Virtuoso
can become a useful platform for researchers to implement,
compare and evaluate new and existing VM designs. To enable further research, we make Virtuoso freely available at
https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/Virtuoso.

Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers of MICRO 2024 and
ASPLOS 2025 for their feedback and the SAFARI Research
Group members for providing a stimulating intellectual environment. We thank Ian Ganz for his help during early stages
of this work. We acknowledge the generous gifts from our
industrial partners: Google, Huawei, Intel, Microsoft, and
VMware, and the Semiconductor Research Corporation. This
work was supported in part by the ETH Future Computing
Laboratory.

References
[1] Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Breaking the Address Translation Wall By
Accelerating Memory Replays. In IEEE Micro, 2018.
[2] Steven M Hand. Self-Paging in the Nemesis Operating System. In
OSDI, 1999.
[3] Kai Li and Paul Hudak. Memory Coherence in Shared Virtual Memory
Systems. In TOCS, 1989.
[4] Andrew W. Appel and Kai Li. Virtual Memory Primitives for User
Programs. In ASPLOS, 1991.
[5] Richard Rashid, Avadis Tevanian, Michael Young, David Golub,
Robert Baron, David Black, William Bolosky, and Jonathan Chew.
Machine-Independent Virtual Memory Management for Paged
Uniprocessor and Multiprocessor Architectures. In OSR, 1987.

16

[49] Linux. 5 Level Paging. https://docs.kernel.org/x86/x8664/5levelpaging.html, 2021.
[50] Kaiyang Zhao, Kaiwen Xue, Ziqi Wang, Dan Schatzberg, Leon Yang,
Antonis Manousis, Johannes Weiner, Rik Van Riel, Bikash Sharma,
Chunqiang Tang, and Dimitrios Skarlatos. Contiguitas: the Pursuit
of Physical Memory Contiguity in Datacenters. In ISCA, 2023.
[51] Sandeep Kumar, Aravinda Prasad, Smruti R. Sarangi, and Sreenivas
Subramoney. Radiant: Efficient Page Table Management for Tiered
Memory Systems. In ISMM, 2021.
[52] Abhishek Bhattacharjee and Margaret Martonosi. Characterizing the
TLB Behavior of Emerging Parallel Workloads On Chip Multiprocessors. In PACT, 2009.
[53] Swapnil Haria, Mark D. Hill, and Michael M. Swift. Devirtualizing
Memory in Heterogeneous Systems. In ASPLOS, 2018.
[54] Idan Yaniv and Dan Tsafrir. Hash, Don’t Cache (the Page Table). In
SIGMETRICS, 2016.
[55] Timothy Merrifield and H. Reza Taheri. Performance ImplicatiOns of
Extended Page Tables On Virtualized X86 Processors. In VEE, 2016.
[56] Peter Hornyack, Luis Ceze, Steve Gribble, Dan Ports, and Hank Levy.
A Study of Virtual Memory Usage and Implications for Large Memory.
Technical report, 2013.
[57] Nick Lindsay and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Understanding Address
Translation Scaling Behaviours Using Hardware Performance Counters. In IISWC, 2024.
[58] Intel Corp. 3rd Generation Intel® Xeon® Scalable processore. https:
//www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/docs/processors/
embedded/3rd-gen-xeon-scalable-iot-product-brief.html.
[59] Yang Li, Saugata Ghose, Jongmoo Choi, Jin Sun, Hui Wang, and Onur
Mutlu. Utility-Based Hybrid Memory Management. In CLUSTER,
2017.
[60] Jishen Zhao, Onur Mutlu, and Yuan Xie. FIRM: Fair and HighPerformance Memory Control for Persistent Memory Systems. In
MICRO, 2014.
[61] Reza Salkhordeh, Onur Mutlu, and Hossein Asadi. An Analytical
Model for Performance and Lifetime Estimation of Hybrid DRAMNVM Main Memories. In TC, 2019.
[62] Justin Meza, Jichuan Chang, HanBin Yoon, Onur Mutlu, and
Parthasarathy Ranganathan. Enabling Efficient and Scalable Hybrid Memories using Fine-granularity DRAM Cache Management.
In CAL, 2012.
[63] Sihang Liu, Korakit Seemakhupt, Gennady Pekhimenko, Aasheesh
Kolli, and Samira Khan. Janus: Optimizing Memory and Storage
Support for Non-Volatile Memory Systems. In ISCA, 2019.
[64] Chloe Alverti, Vasileios Karakostas, Nikhita Kunati, Georgios
Goumas, and Michael Swift. DaxVM: Stressing the Limits of Memory
as a File Interface. In MICRO 2022.
[65] Shai Bergman, Priyank Faldu, Boris Grot, Lluís Vilanova, and Mark
Silberstein. Reconsidering OS Memory Optimizations in the Presence
of Disaggregated Memory. In ISMM, 2022.
[66] Hyungkyu Ham, Jeongmin Hong, Geonwoo Park, Yunseon Shin,
Okkyun Woo, Wonhyuk Yang, Jinhoon Bae, Eunhyeok Park, Hyojin
Sung, Euicheol Lim, and Gwangsun Kim. Low-Overhead GeneralPurpose Near-Data Processing in CXL Memory Expanders. In MICRO,
2024.
[67] Houxiang Ji, Srikar Vanavasam, Yang Zhou, Qirong Xia, Jinghan
Huang, Yifan Yuan, Ren Wang, Pekon Gupta, Bhushan Chitlur, Ipoom
Jeong, and Nam Sung Kim. Demystifying a CXL Type-2 Device: A
Heterogeneous Cooperative Computing Perspective. In MICRO, 2024.
[68] Yan Sun, Yifan Yuan, Zeduo Yu, Reese Kuper, Chihun Song, Jinghan
Huang, Houxiang Ji, Siddharth Agarwal, Jiaqi Lou, Ipoom Jeong, Ren
Wang, Jung Ho Ahn, Tianyin Xu, and Nam Sung Kim. Demystifying
CXL Memory with Genuine CXL-Ready Systems and Devices. In
MICRO, 2023.

[32] John R. Tramm, Andrew R. Siegel, Tanzima Islam, and Martin Schulz.
XSBench - The Development and Verification of a Performance Abstraction for Monte Carlo Reactor Analysis. In PHYSOR, 2014.
[33] Lifeng Nai, Yinglong Xia, Ilie G. Tanase, Hyesoon Kim, and ChingYung Lin. GraphBIG: Understanding Graph Computing in the Context
of Industrial Solutions. In SC, 2015.
[34] R. Hwang, T. Kim, Y. Kwon, and M. Rhu. Centaur: A Chiplet-Based,
Hybrid Sparse-Dense Accelerator for Personalized Recommendations.
In ISCA, 2020.
[35] Udit Gupta, Carole-Jean Wu, Xiaodong Wang, Maxim Naumov, Brandon Reagen, David Brooks, Bradford Cottel, Kim Hazelwood, Mark
Hempstead, Bill Jia, Hsien-Hsin S. Lee, Andrey Malevich, Dheevatsa
Mudigere, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, Liang Xiong, and Xuan Zhang. The
Architectural Implications of Facebook’s DNN-Based Personalized
Recommendation. In HPCA, 2020.
[36] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving
with PagedAttention. In SOSP, 2023.
[37] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand,
Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard
Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7B. In arXiv, 2023.
[38] Shikhar Murty, Christopher Manning, Peter Shaw, Mandar Joshi, and
Kenton Lee. BAGEL: Bootstrapping Agents by Guiding Exploration
with Language. In ICML, 2024.
[39] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman
Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin,
Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and Efficient
Foundation Language Models. In arXiv, 2023.
[40] Dmitrii Ustiugov, Plamen Petrov, Marios Kogias, Edouard Bugnion,
and Boris Grot. Benchmarking, Analysis, and Optimization of Serverless Function Snapshots. In ASPLOS, 2021.
[41] David Schall, Andreas Sandberg, and Boris Grot. Warming Up a Cold
Front-End with Ignite. In MICRO, 2023.
[42] Ziqi Wang, Kaiyang Zhao, Pei Li, Andrew Jacob, Michael Kozuch,
Todd Mowry, and Dimitrios Skarlatos. Memento: Architectural Support for Ephemeral Memory Management in Serverless Environments.
In MICRO, 2023.
[43] Dong Du, Tianyi Yu, Yubin Xia, Binyu Zang, Guanglu Yan, Chenggang
Qin, Qixuan Wu, and Haibo Chen. Catalyzer: Sub-Millisecond Startup
for Serverless Computing with Initialization-Less Booting. ASPLOS,
2020.
[44] Mohammad Shahrad, Jonathan Balkind, and David Wentzlaff. Architectural Implications of Function-as-a-Service Computing. MICRO,
2019.
[45] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Dailun Cheng, Ankitha Shetty, Priyal Rathi,
Nayan Katarki, Ariana Bruno, Justin Hu, Brian Ritchken, Brendon
Jackson, Kelvin Hu, Meghna Pancholi, Yuan He, Brett Clancy, Chris
Colen, Fukang Wen, Catherine Leung, Siyuan Wang, Leon Zaruvinsky, Mateo Espinosa, Rick Lin, Zhongling Liu, Jake Padilla, and
Christina Delimitrou. An Open-Source Benchmark Suite for Microservices and Their Hardware-Software Implications for Cloud &
Edge Systems. In ASPLOS, 2019.
[46] Arkaprava Basu, Jayneel Gandhi, Jichuan Chang, Mark D. Hill, and
Michael M. Swift. Efficient Virtual Memory for Big Memory Servers.
In ISCA, 2013.
[47] Vasileios Karakostas, Osman S. Unsal, Mario Nemirovsky, Adrian
Cristal, and Michael Swift. Performance Analysis of the Memory
Management Unit Under Scale-Out Workloads. In IISWC, 2014.
[48] Thomas W. Barr, Alan L. Cox, and Scott Rixner. Translation Caching:
Skip, Don’t Walk (the Page Table). In ISCA, 2010.

17

[89] Atul Adya, Robert Grandl, Daniel Myers, and Henry Qin. Fast KeyValue Stores: An Idea Whose Time Has Come and Gone. In HotOS,
2019.
[90] Andres Lagar-Cavilla, Junwhan Ahn, Suleiman Souhlal, Neha Agarwal, Radoslaw Burny, Shakeel Butt, Jichuan Chang, Ashwin Chaugule, Nan Deng, Junaid Shahid, Greg Thelen, Kamil Adam Yurtsever,
Yu Zhao, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. Software-Defined Far
Memory in Warehouse-Scale Computers. In ASPLOS, 2019.
[91] Christian Pinto, Dimitris Syrivelis, Michele Gazzetti, Panos Koutsovasilis, Andrea Reale, Kostas Katrinis, and H. Peter Hofstee. ThymesisFlow: A Software-Defined, HW/SW co-Designed Interconnect Stack
for Rack-Scale Memory Disaggregation. In MICRO, 2020.
[92] Juncheng Gu, Youngmoon Lee, Yiwen Zhang, Mosharaf Chowdhury,
and Kang G. Shin. Efficient Memory Disaggregation with Infiniswap.
In NSDI, 2017.
[93] Dhantu Buragohain, Abhishek Ghogare, Trishal Patel, Mythili Vutukuru, and Purushottam Kulkarni. DiME: A Performance Emulator
for Disaggregated Memory Architectures. In APSys, 2017.
[94] Georgios Zervas, Hui Yuan, Arsalan Saljoghei, Qianqiao Chen, and
Vaibhawa Mishra. Optically Disaggregated Data Centers with Minimal Remote Memory Latency: Technologies, Architectures, and Resource Allocation. In JOCN, 2018.
[95] Swapnil Haria, Michael M. Swift, and Mark D. Hill. Devirtualizing
Virtual Memory for Heterogeneous Systems. In ASPLOS, 2018.
[96] Chang Hyun Park, Ilias Vougioukas, Andreas Sandberg, and David
Black-Schaffer. Every Walk’s a Hit: Making Page Walks Single-Access
Cache Hits. In ASPLOS, 2022.
[97] Dimitrios Skarlatos, Apostolos Kokolis, Tianyin Xu, and Josep Torrellas. Elastic Cuckoo Page Tables: Rethinking Virtual Memory Translation for Parallelism. In ASPLOS, 2020.
[98] Jovan Stojkovic, Namrata Mantri, Dimitrios Skarlatos, Tianyin Xu,
and Josep Torrellas. Memory-Efficient Hashed Page Tables. In HPCA,
2023.
[99] Kevin Hsieh, Samira Khan, Nandita Vijaykumar, Kevin K. Chang,
Amirali Boroumand, Saugata Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. Accelerating
Pointer Chasing in 3D-stacked Memory: Challenges, Mechanisms,
Evaluation. In ICCD, 2016.
[100] Reto Achermann, Ashish Panwar, Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Timothy
Roscoe, and Jayneel Gandhi. Mitosis: Transparently Self-Replicating
Page-Tables for Large-Memory Machines. In ASPLOS, 2020.
[101] Sam Ainsworth and Timothy M. Jones. Compendia: Reducing VirtualMemory Costs Via Selective Densification. In ISMM, 2021.
[102] Hanna Alam, Tianhao Zhang, Mattan Erez, and Yoav Etsion. Do-ItYourself Virtual Memory Translation. In ISCA, 2017.
[103] Osang Kwon, Yongho Lee, Junhyeok Park, Sungbin Jang, Byungchul
Tak, and Seokin Hong. Distributed Page Table: Harnessing Physical
Memory as an Unbounded Hashed Page Table. In MICRO, 2024.
[104] V. Karakostas, J. Gandhi, F. Ayar, A. Cristal, M. D. Hill, K. S. McKinley,
M. Nemirovsky, M. M. Swift, and O. Ünsal. Redundant Memory
Mappings for Fast Access to Large Memories. In ISCA, 2015.
[105] Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Rahul Bera, Kosta Stojiljkovic, Nisa
Bostanci, Can Firtina, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Rakesh Kumar, Nastaran Hajinazar, Jisung Park, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Nandita Vijaykumar, and Onur Mutlu. Utopia: Efficient Address Translation
using Hybrid Virtual-to-Physical Address Mapping. In MICRO, 2023.
[106] Nastaran Hajinazar, Pratyush Patel, Minesh Patel, Konstantinos
Kanellopoulos, Saugata Ghose, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Geraldo F.
Oliveira, Jonathan Appavoo, Vivek Seshadri, and Onur Mutlu. The
Virtual Block Interface: A Flexible Alternative to the Conventional
Virtual Memory Framework. In ISCA, 2020.
[107] Krishnan Gosakan, Jaehyun Han, William Kuszmaul, Ibrahim Nael
Mubarek, Nirjhar Mukherjee, Guido Tagliavini, Evan West, Michael
Bender, Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Alex Conway, Martin Farach-Colton,
Jayneel Gandhi, Rob Johnson, Sudarsun Kannan, and Donald Porter.

[69] Dimosthenis Masouros, Christian Pinto, Michele Gazzetti, Sotirios
Xydis, and Dimitrios Soudris. Adrias: Interference-aware memory
orchestration for disaggregated cloud infrastructures. In HPCA, 2023.
[70] Zhiyuan Guo, Yizhou Shan, Xuhao Luo, Yutong Huang, and Yiying Zhang. Clio: A Hardware-software co-designed Disaggregated
Memory system. In ASPLOS, 2022.
[71] Peter X. Gao, Akshay Narayan, Sagar Karandikar, Joao Carreira,
Sangjin Han, Rachit Agarwal, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker.
Network Requirements for Resource Disaggregation. In OSDI, 2016.
[72] Yizhou Shan, Yutong Huang, Yilun Chen, and Yiying Zhang. LegoOS:
A Disseminated, Distributed OS for Hardware Resource Disaggregation. In OSDI, 2018.
[73] Dario Korolija, Dimitrios Koutsoukos, Kimberly Keeton, Konstantin
Taranov, Dejan S. Milojicic, and Gustavo Alonso. Farview: Disaggregated Memory with Operator Off-loading for Database Engines. In
CIDR, 2022.
[74] Chenxi Wang, Haoran Ma, Shi Liu, Yuanqi Li, Zhenyuan Ruan, Khanh
Nguyen, Michael D. Bond, Ravi Netravali, Miryung Kim, and Guoqing Harry Xu. Semeru: A Memory-Disaggregated Managed Runtime.
In OSDI, 2020.
[75] Pengfei Zuo, Jiazhao Sun, Liu Yang, Shuangwu Zhang, and Yu Hua.
One-sided RDMA-Conscious Extendible Hashing for Disaggregated
Memory. In ATC, 2021.
[76] Hasan Al Maruf and Mosharaf Chowdhury. Effectively Prefetching
Remote Memory with Leap. In ATC, 2020.
[77] Kevin Lim, Jichuan Chang, Trevor Mudge, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Steven K. Reinhardt, and Thomas F. Wenisch. Disaggregated Memory for Expansion and Sharing in Blade Servers. In ISCA,
2009.
[78] Qizhen Zhang, Yifan Cai, Sebastian Angel, Vincent Liu, Ang Chen,
and Boon Thau Loo. Rethinking Data Management Systems for
Disaggregated Data Centers. In CIDR, 2020.
[79] Zi Yan, Daniel Lustig, David Nellans, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee.
Nimble Page Management for Tiered Memory Systems. In ASPLOS,
2019.
[80] Sebastian Angel, Mihir Nanavati, and Siddhartha Sen. Disaggregation
and the Application. In HotCloud, 2020.
[81] Kevin Lim, Yoshio Turner, Jose Renato Santos, Alvin AuYoung,
Jichuan Chang, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and Thomas F. Wenisch.
System-Level Implications of Disaggregated Memory. In HPCA, 2012.
[82] Ivy Peng, Roger Pearce, and Maya Gokhale. On the Memory Underutilization: Exploring Disaggregated Memory on HPC Systems. In
SBAC-PAD, 2020.
[83] Laurent Bindschaedler, Ashvin Goel, and Willy Zwaenepoel. Hailstorm: Disaggregated Compute and Storage for Distributed LSMBased Databases. In ASPLOS, 2020.
[84] K. Katrinis, D. Syrivelis, D. Pnevmatikatos, G. Zervas, D. Theodoropoulos, I. Koutsopoulos, K. Hasharoni, D. Raho, C. Pinto, F. Espina,
S. Lopez-Buedo, Q. Chen, M. Nemirovsky, D. Roca, H. Klos, and
T. Berends. Rack-Scale Disaggregated Cloud Data Centers: The dReDBox Project Vision. In DATE, 2016.
[85] Marcos K. Aguilera, Nadav Amit, Irina Calciu, Xavier Deguillard,
Jayneel Gandhi, Pratap Subrahmanyam, Lalith Suresh, Kiran Tati,
Rajesh Venkatasubramanian, and Michael Wei. Remote Memory in
the Age of Fast Networks. In SoCC, 2017.
[86] Marcos K. Aguilera, Nadav Amit, Irina Calciu, Xavier Deguillard,
Jayneel Gandhi, Stanko Novakovic, Arun Ramanathan, Pratap Subrahmanyam, Lalith Suresh, Kiran Tati, Rajesh Venkatasubramanian,
and Michael Wei. Remote Regions: A Simple Abstraction for Remote
Memory. In ATC, 2018.
[87] Pramod Subba Rao and George Porter. Is Memory Disaggregation
Feasible? A Case Study with Spark SQL. In ANCS, 2016.
[88] Irina Calciu, M. Talha Imran, Ivan Puddu, Sanidhya Kashyap,
Hasan Al Maruf, Onur Mutlu, and Aasheesh Kolli. Rethinking Software Runtimes for Disaggregated Memory. In ASPLOS, 2021.

18

Mosaic Pages: Big TLB Reach with Small Pages. In ASPLOS, 2023.
[108] Arkaprava Basu, Jayneel Gandhi, Jichuan Chang, Mark D. Hill, and
Michael M. Swift. Efficient Virtual Memory for Big Memory Servers.
In ISCA 2013.
[109] Javier Picorel, Djordje Jevdjic, and Babak Falsafi. Near-Memory
Address Translation. In PACT, 2017.
[110] Lixin Zhang, Evan Speight, Ram Rajamony, and Jiang Lin. Enigma:
Architectural and Operating System Support for Reducing the Impact
of Address Translation. In ICS, 2010.
[111] Siddharth Gupta, Atri Bhattacharyya, Yunho Oh, Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Babak Falsafi, and Mathias Payer. Rebooting Virtual Memory with Midgard. In ISCA, 2021.
[112] Youngjin Kwon, Hangchen Yu, Simon Peter, Christopher J. Rossbach,
and Emmett Witchel. Coordinated and Efficient Huge Page Management with Ingens. In OSDI, 2016.
[113] Zi Yan, Daniel Lustig, David Nellans, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee.
Translation Ranger: Operating System Support for Contiguity-Aware
TLBs. In ISCA, 2019.
[114] Jonathan Corbet. Transparent Huge Pages in 2.6.38. https://lwn.net/
Articles/423584/, 2011.
[115] Jonathan Corbet. The Current State of Kernel Page-Table Isolation.
https://lwn.net/Articles/741878/, 2017.
[116] Venkat Sri Sai Ram, Ashish Panwar, and Arkaprava Basu. Trident:
Harnessing Architectural Resources for All Page Sizes in X86 Processors. In MICRO, 2021.
[117] Stratos Psomadakis, Chloe Alverti, Vasileios Karakostas, Christos Katsakioris, Dimitrios Siakavaras, Konstantinos Nikas, Georgios Goumas,
and Nectarios Koziris. Elastic Translations: Fast Virtual Memory with
Multiple Translation Sizes. In MICRO, 2024.
[118] Jee Ho Ryoo, Nagendra Gulur, Shuang Song, and Lizy K. John. RethInking TLB Designs in Virtualized Environments: A Very Large
Part-of-Memory TLB. In ISCA, 2017.
[119] Yashwant Marathe, Nagendra Gulur, Jee Ho Ryoo, Shuang Song, and
Lizy K. John. CSALT: Context Switch Aware Large TLB. In MICRO,
2017.
[120] Yunfang Tai, Wanwei Cai, Qi Liu, Ge Zhang, and Wenzhi Wang.
Comparisons of Memory Virtualization Solutions for Architectures
with Software-Managed TLBs. In NAS, 2013.
[121] Xiaotao Chang, Hubertus Franke, Yi Ge, Tao Liu, Kun Wang, Jimi
Xenidis, Fei Chen, and Yu Zhang. Improving Virtualization in the
Presence of Software Managed Translation Lookaside Buffers. In
ISCA, 2013.
[122] Richard Uhlig, David Nagle, Tim Stanley, Trevor Mudge, Stuart
Sechrest, and Richard Brown. Design Tradeoffs for SoftwareManaged TLBs. In TOCS, 1994.
[123] D. R. Cheriton, G. A. Slavenburg, and P. D. Boyle. Software-Controlled
Caches in the VMP Multiprocessor. In ISCA, 1986.
[124] David Nagle, Richard Uhlig, Tim Stanley, Stuart Sechrest, Trevor N.
Mudge, and Richard B. Brown. Design Tradeoffs for Softwaremanaged TLBs. In ISCA, 1993.
[125] Kavita Bala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and William E. Weihl. Software
Prefetching and Caching for Translation Lookaside Buffers. In OSDI,
1994.
[126] Faruk Guvenilir and Yale N Patt. Tailored Page Sizes. In ISCA, 2020.
[127] Misel-Myrto Papadopoulou, Xin Tong, André Seznec, and Andreas
Moshovos. Prediction-Based Superpage-Friendly TLB Designs. In
HPCA, 2015.
[128] Chang Hyun Park, Taekyung Heo, Jungi Jeong, and Jaehyuk Huh.
Hybrid TLB Coalescing: Improving TLB Translation Coverage Under
Diverse Fragmented Memory Allocations. In ISCA, 2017.
[129] Chloe Alverti, Stratos Psomadakis, Vasileios Karakostas, Jayneel
Gandhi, Konstantinos Nikas, Georgios Goumas, and Nectarios Koziris.
Enhancing and Exploiting Contiguity for Fast Memory Virtualization.
In ISCA, 2020.

[130] Chandrahas Tirumalasetty, Chih Chieh Chou, Narasimha Reddy, Paul
Gratz, and Ayman Abouelwafa. Reducing Minor Page Fault Overheads through Enhanced Page Walker. In TACO, 2022.
[131] HPS Research Group. “hpsresearchgroup/scarab: Joint HPS and ETH
repository to work towards open sourcing Scarab and Ramulator.”.
https://github.com/hpsresearchgroup/scarab.
[132] ChampSim. https://github.com/ChampSim/ChampSim.
[133] Trevor E. Carlson, Wim Heirman, and Lieven Eeckhout. Sniper:
Exploring the Level of Abstraction for Scalable and Accurate Parallel
Multi-Core Simulations. In SC, 2011.
[134] D. Ernst T. Austin, E. Larson. SimpleScalar: an infrastructure for
computer system modeling. In IEEE Computer, 2002.
[135] Rafael Ubal, Byunghyun Jang, Perhaad Mistry, Dana Schaa, and David
Kaeli. Multi2Sim: A Simulation Framework for CPU-GPU Computing.
In PACT, 2012.
[136] Nathan Binkert, Bradford Beckmann, Gabriel Black, Steven K. Reinhardt, Ali Saidi, Arkaprava Basu, Joel Hestness, Derek R. Hower,
Tushar Krishna, Somayeh Sardashti, Rathijit Sen, Korey Sewell,
Muhammad Shoaib, Nilay Vaish, Mark D. Hill, and David A. Wood.
The gem5 Simulator. 2011.
[137] Vasileios Karakostas, Jayneel Gandhi, Furkan Ayar, Adrián Cristal,
Mark D. Hill, Kathryn S. McKinley, Mario Nemirovsky, Michael M.
Swift, and Osman Ünsal. Redundant Memory Mappings for Fast
Access to Large Memories. In ISCA, 2015.
[138] Artemiy Margaritov, Dmitrii Ustiugov, Edouard Bugnion, and Boris
Grot. Prefetched Address Translation. In MICRO, 2019.
[139] Guilherme Cox and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Efficient Address Translation for Architectures with Multiple Page Sizes. In ASPLOS, 2017.
[140] Binh Pham, Ján Veselý, Gabriel H. Loh, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee.
Large Pages and Lightweight Memory Management in Virtualized
Environments: Can You Have It Both Ways? In MICRO, 2015.
[141] Thomas W. Barr, Alan L. Cox, and Scott Rixner. SpecTLB: A Mechanism for Speculative Address Translation. In ISCA, 2011.
[142] Haocong Luo, Yahya Can Tuğrul, F. Nisa Bostancı, Ataberk Olgun,
A. Giray Yağlıkçı, , and Onur Mutlu. Ramulator 2.0: A Modern,
Modular, and Extensible DRAM Simulator. In CAL, 2023.
[143] Daniel Sanchez and Christos Kozyrakis. ZSim: Fast and Accurate
Microarchitectural Simulation of Thousand-Core Systems. In ISCA,
2013.
[144] Amit Puri, Kartheek Bellamkonda, Kailash Narreddy, John Jose,
Venkatesh Tamarapalli, and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan. DRackSim:
Simulating CXL-Enabled Large-Scale Disaggregated Memory Systems. In PADS, 2024.
[145] Aamer Jaleel, Robert S. Cohn, Chi-Keung Luk, and Bruce Jacob. CMPSim: A Pin-Based On-The-Fly Multi-Core Cache Simulator. In Workshop on Modeling, Benchmarking and Simulation, 2008.
[146] EPFL Parallel Systems Architecture Lab (PARSA). QFlex, 2020.
[147] Bjarne Stroustrup. The C++ Programming Language. 2013.
[148] Linus Torvalds. Linux (5.15) [operating system]. https://github.com/
torvalds/linux/releases/tag/.
[149] Yoongu Kim, Weikun Yang, and Onur Mutlu. Ramulator: A Fast and
Extensible DRAM Simulator. In CAL, 2015.
[150] Arash Tavakkol, Juan Gómez-Luna, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Saugata
Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. MQSim: A Framework for Enabling Realistic
Studies of Modern Multi-Queue SSD Devices. In FAST, 2018.
[151] Vasileios Karakostas, Jayneel Gandhi, Furkan Ayar, Adrián Cristal,
Mark D. Hill, Kathryn S. McKinley, Mario Nemirovsky, Michael M.
Swift, and Osman Ünsal. Redundant Memory Mappings for Fast
Access to Large Memories. In ISCA, 2015.
[152] Gyusun Lee, Wenjing Jin, Wonsuk Song, Jeonghun Gong, Jonghyun
Bae, Tae Jun Ham, Jae W. Lee, and Jinkyu Jeong. A Case for HardwareBased Demand Paging. In ISCA, 2020.
[153] Intel Xeon Gold 6226R. https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/xeon_gold/
6226r.

19

[154] Junwhan Ahn, Sungpack Hong, Sungjoo Yoo, Onur Mutlu, and Kiyoung Choi. A Scalable Processing-in-Memory Accelerator for Parallel
Graph Processing. In ISCA, 2015.
[155] Junwhan Ahn, Sungjoo Yoo, Onur Mutlu, and Kiyoung Choi. PIMEnabled Instructions: A Low-Overhead, Locality-Aware Processingin-Memory Architecture. In ISCA, 2015.
[156] Saugata Ghose, Amirali Boroumand, Jeremie S Kim, Juan GómezLuna, and Onur Mutlu. Processing-in-Memory: A Workload-Driven
Perspective. In IBM Journal, 2019.
[157] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Rachata
Ausavarungnirun. Processing Data Where It Makes Sense: Enabling
In-Memory Computation. In arXiv, 2019.
[158] Mingyu Gao and Christos Kozyrakis. HRL: Efficient and Flexible
Reconfigurable Logic for Near-Data Processing. In HPCA, 2016.
[159] Yueqi Wang, Bingyao Li, Mohamed Tarek Ibn Ziad, Lieven Eeckhout,
Jun Yang, Aamer Jaleel, and Xulong Tang. OASIS: Object-Aware Page
Management for Multi-GPU Systems. In HPCA, 2025.
[160] Yueqi Wang, Bingyao Li, Aamer Jaleel, Jun Yang, and Xulong Tang.
GRIT: Enhancing Multi-GPU Performance with Fine-Grained Dynamic Page Placement. In HPCA, 2024.
[161] Jovan Stojkovic, Namrata Mantri, Dimitrios Skarlatos, Tianyin Xu,
and Josep Torrellas. Memory-Efficient Hashed Page Tables. In HPCA,
2023.
[162] Jayneel Gandhi, Mark D. Hill, and Michael M. Swift. Agile Paging:
Exceeding the Best of Nested and Shadow Paging. In ISCA, 2016.
[163] Dongwei Chen, Dong Tong, Chun Yang, Jiangfang Yi, and Xu Cheng.
FlexPointer: Fast Address TranslatiOn Based On Range TLB and
Tagged Pointers. In TACO, 2023.
[164] Binh Pham, Viswanathan Vaidyanathan, Aamer Jaleel, and Abhishek
Bhattacharjee. CoLT: Coalesced Large-Reach TLBs. In MICRO, 2012.
[165] Jiyuan Zhang, Weiwei Jia, Siyuan Chai, Peizhe Liu, Jongyul Kim,
and Tianyin Xu. Direct Memory Translation for Virtualized Clouds.
ASPLOS, 2024.
[166] B Frey. PowerPC Architecture Book 2003. www.ibm.com/
developerworks/eserver/articles/archguide.html.
[167] Aamer Jaleel, Eiman Ebrahimi, and Sam Duncan. DUCATI: HighPerformance Address Translation by Extending TLB Reach of GPUAccelerated Systems. In TACO, 2019.
[168] M.T. Yourst. PTLsim: A Cycle Accurate Full System x86-64 Microarchitectural Simulator. In ISPASS, 2007.
[169] Emmett Witchel, Josh Cates, and Krste Asanović. Mondrian Memory
Protection. In ASPLOS, 2002.
[170] Georgios Vavouliotis, Lluc Alvarez, Vasileios Karakostas, Konstantinos Nikas, Nectarios Koziris, Daniel A. Jiménez, and Marc Casas.
Exploiting Page Table Locality for Agile TLB Prefetching. In ISCA,
2021.
[171] Nandita Vijaykumar, Abhilasha Jain, Diptesh Majumdar, Kevin Hsieh,
Gennady Pekhimenko, Eiman Ebrahimi, Nastaran Hajinazar, Phillip B.
Gibbons, and Onur Mutlu. A Case for Richer Cross-Layer Abstractions: Bridging the Semantic Gap with Expressive Memory. In ISCA,
2018.
[172] Longyu Zhao, Zongwu Wang, Fangxin Liu, and Li Jiang. Ninja: A
hardware assisted system for accelerating nested address translation.
In ICCD, 2024.
[173] Advanced Micro Devices. AMD-V Nested Paging, White Paper. http://developer.amd.com/wordpress/media/2012/10/NPT-WP1%201-final-TM.pdf.
[174] Juan Navarro, Sitaram Iyer, Peter Druschel, and Alan Cox. Practical,
Transparent Operating System Support for Superpages. In OSDI,
2002.
[175] Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Hong Chul Nam, F. Nisa Bostanci, Rahul
Bera, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Rakesh Kumar, Davide Basilio Bartolini, and Onur Mutlu. Victima: Drastically Increasing Address
Translation Reach by Leveraging Underutilized Cache Resources. In

MICRO, 2023.
[176] Mark Mansi, Bijan Tabatabai, and Michael M. Swift. CBMM: Financial
Advice for Kernel Memory Managers. In ATC, 2022.
[177] Mark Mansi and Michael M. Swift. Characterizing Physical Memory
Fragmentation. In arXiv, 2024.
[178] stress-ng. https://github.com/ColinIanKing/stress-ng.
[179] mmap() System Call. https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/
mmap.2.html.
[180] Nikolaos Hardavellas, Stephen Somogyi, Thomas F. Wenisch,
Roland E. Wunderlich, Shelley Chen, Jangwoo Kim, Babak Falsafi,
James C. Hoe, and Andreas Nowatzyk. SimFlex: A Fast, Accurate,
Flexible Full-System Simulation Framework for Performance Evaluation of Server Architecture. In SIGMETRICS, 2004.
[181] Jason E. Miller, Harshad Kasture, George Kurian, Charles Gruenwald,
Nathan Beckmann, Christopher Celio, Jonathan Eastep, and Anant
Agarwal. Graphite: A Distributed Parallel Simulator for Multicores.
In HPCA, 2010.
[182] P.S. Magnusson, M. Christensson, J. Eskilson, D. Forsgren, G. Hallberg,
J. Hogberg, F. Larsson, A. Moestedt, and B. Werner. Simics: A Full
System Simulation Platform. In IEEE Computer, 2002.
[183] A. Patel, F. Afram, S. Chen, and K. Ghose. MARSS: A Full System
Simulator for Multicore x86 CPUs. In DAC, 2011.
[184] Ryan R. Curtin, Marcus Edel, Omar Shrit, Shubham Agrawal, Suryoday Basak, James J. Balamuta, Ryan Birmingham, Kartik Dutt, Dirk Eddelbuettel, Rishabh Garg, Shikhar Jaiswal, Aakash Kaushik, Sangyeon
Kim, Anjishnu Mukherjee, Nanubala Gnana Sai, Nippun Sharma,
Yashwant Singh Parihar, Roshan Swain, and Conrad Sanderson. mlpack 4: A Fast, Header-Only C++ Machine Learning Library. In
Journal of Open Source Software, 2023.
[185] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng
Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean,
Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz
Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat
Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster,
Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul
Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol
Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu,
and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems. In arXiv, 2015.
[186] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James
Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia
Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward
Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala.
PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning
Library. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[187] Pin - A Dynamic Binary Instrumentation Tool. https://software.intel.
com/en-us/articles/pin-a-dynamic-binary-instrumentation-tool.
[188] DynamoRio. https://github.com/DynamoRIO/dynamorio.
[189] Fred Zlotnick. The POSIX.1 Standard: a Programmer’s guide. 1991.
[190] Posix shared memory. https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/
shm_overview.7.html.
[191] Onur Mutlu, Jared Stark, Chris Wilkerson, and Yale N. Patt. Runahead
Execution: An Effective Alternative to Large Instruction Windows.
In HPCA 2003.
[192] Tanausu Ramirez, Alex Pajuelo, Oliverio J Santana, and Mateo Valero.
Runahead Threads to Improve SMT Performance. In HPCA, 2008.
[193] Kernel Development Community. The Linux Kernel 6.10 Manual.
https://docs.kernel.org/6.10/mm/page_cache.html.
[194] Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Vol. 3:
System Programming Guide 3A 4-19.
[195] Anonymous Memory. https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/mm/
concepts.html.

20

[196] Mike Kravetz. Hugetlbfs Reservation. https://www.kernel.org/doc/
html/v4.20/vm/hugetlbfs_reserv.html, 2017.
[197] Jeff Bonwick. The Slab Allocator: An Object-Caching Kernel Memory
Allocator. In USTC, 1994.
[198] Khugepage Daemon. https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/
vm/transhuge.txt.
[199] Swap Management. https://www.kernel.org/doc/gorman/html/
understand/understand014.html.
[200] Raúl Cervera, Toni Cortes, and Yolanda Becerra. Improving Application Performance Through Swap Compression. In ATC, 1999.
[201] Linux KVM. https://linux-kvm.org/page/Main_Page.
[202] Paul Rosenfeld, Elliott Cooper-Balis, and Bruce Jacob. DRAMSim2: A
Cycle Accurate Memory System Simulator. volume 10, pages 16–19.
IEEE, 2011.
[203] Stijn Eyerman, Sam Van den Steen, Wim Heirman, and Ibrahim Hur.
Simulating Wrong-Path Instructions in Decoupled Functional-First
Simulation. In ISPASS, 2023.
[204] Onur Mutlu, Hyesoon Kim, David N Armstrong, and Yale N Patt.
An Analysis of the Performance Impact of Wrong-path Memory
References on Out-of-order and Runahead Execution Processors. In
TACO, 2005.
[205] Nadav Amit, Muli Ben-Yehuda, and Ben-Ami Yassour. IOMMU: strategies for mitigating the IOTLB bottleneck. In ISCA, 2010.
[206] Debashis Ganguly, Ziyu Zhang, Jun Yang, and Rami Melhem. Interplay Between Hardware Prefetcher and Page Eviction Policy in
Cpu-Gpu Unified Virtual Memory. In ISCA, 2019.
[207] Yifan Sun, Trinayan Baruah, Saiful A. Mojumder, Shi Dong, Xiang Gong, Shane Treadway, Yuhui Bao, Spencer Hance, Carter McCardwell, Vincent Zhao, Harrison Barclay, Amir Kavyan Ziabari,
Zhongliang Chen, Rafael Ubal, José L. Abellán, John Kim, Ajay Joshi,
and David Kaeli. MGPUSim: Enabling Multi-GPU Performance Modeling and Optimization. In ISCA, 2019.
[208] NVIDIA Linux Open GPU Kernel Module. https://github.com/
NVIDIA/open-gpu-kernel-modules.
[209] Ayaz Akram and Lina Sawalha. x86 Computer Architecture Simulators: A Comparative Study. In ICCD, 2016.
[210] John W. C. Fu, Janak H. Patel, and Bob L. Janssens. Stride Directed
Prefetching in Scalar Processors. In MICRO, 1992.
[211] Aamer Jaleel, Kevin B. Theobald, Simon C. Steely, and Joel Emer.
High Performance Cache Replacement Using Re-Reference Interval
Prediction (RRIP). In ISCA, 2010.
[212] Tien-Fu Chen and Jean-Loup Baer. Effective Hardware-based Data
Prefetching for High-performance Processors. In TC, 1995.
[213] The linux kernel 5.15.0. https://www.kernel.org/.
[214] Intel. 5-Level Paging and 5-Level EPT, 2017.
[215] Google. CITY Hash. https://github.com/google/cityhash.
[216] May Cathy, Silha Ed, Simpson Rick, and Warren Hank. The PowerPC
Architecture: A Specification for a New Family of RISC Processors.
1994.
[217] llama.cpp. https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp.
[218] Yuanyuan Wang, Xia Xie, Qiong He, Hongen Liao, Huabin Zhang,
and Jianwen Luo. Hadamard-Encoded Synthetic Transmit Aperture Imaging for Improved Lateral Motion Estimation in Ultrasound
Elastography. In TUFFC, 2022.
[219] Steven J. Plimpton, Ron Brightwell, Courtenay Vaughan, Keith Underwood, and Mike Davis. A Simple Synchronous Distributed-Memory
Algorithm for the HPCC RandomAccess Benchmark. In Cluster, 2006.
[220] F. Bureau, J. Robin, and A. Le Ber. Three-Dimensional Ultrasound
Matrix Imaging. In Nature Communications, 2023.
[221] ftrace and Function Tracer. https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.1/
trace/ftrace.html.
[222] Cosine Similarity. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity.
[223] Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Konstantinos Sgouras, F. Nisa Bostanci,
Andreas Kosmas Kakolyris, Berkin K. Konar, Rahul Bera, Mohammad

Sadrosadati, Rakesh Kumar, Nandita Vijaykumar, and Onur Mutlu.
Virtuoso: Enabling fast and accurate virtual memory research via an
imitation-based os simulation methodology. In arXiv, 2025.
[224] Davy Genbrugge, Stijn Eyerman, and Lieven Eeckhout. Interval Simulation: Raising the Level of Abstraction in Architectural Simulation.
In HPCA, 2010.
[225] Frederick Ryckbosch, Stijn Polfliet, and Lieven Eeckhout. VSim:
Simulating Multi-Server Setups at Near Native Hardware Speed. In
TACO, 2012.
[226] Trevor E. Carlson, Wim Heirman, and Lieven Eeckhout. Sampled
Simulation of Multi-Threaded Applications. In ISPASS, 2013.
[227] Trevor E. Carlson, Wim Heirman, Kenzo Van Craeynest, and Lieven
Eeckhout. BarrierPoint: Sampled Simulation of Multi-Threaded Applications. In ISPASS, 2014.
[228] Nikos Nikoleris, Lieven Eeckhout, Erik Hagersten, and Trevor E.
Carlson. Directed Statistical Warming through Time Traveling. In
MICRO, 2019.
[229] Wenjie Liu, Wim Heirman, Stijn Eyerman, Shoaib Akram, and Lieven
Eeckhout. Scale-Model Architectural Simulation. In ISPASS, 2022.
[230] Changxi Liu, Alen Sabu, Akanksha Chaudhari, Qingxuan Kang, and
Trevor E. Carlson. Pac-Sim: Simulation of Multi-threaded Workloads
using Intelligent, Live Sampling. In TACO, 2023.
[231] Harish Patil, Alexander Isaev, Wim Heirman, Alen Sabu, Ali Hajiabadi,
and Trevor E. Carlson. ELFies: Executable Region Checkpoints for
Performance Analysis and Simulation. In CGO, 2021.
[232] Alen Sabu, Harish Patil, Wim Heirman, and Trevor E. Carlson. LoopPoint: Checkpoint-driven Sampled Simulation for Multi-threaded
Applications. In HPCA, 2022.
[233] Jayneel Gandhi, Arkaprava Basu, Mark D. Hill, and Michael M. Swift.
BadgerTrap: A Tool to Instrument x86-64 TLB Misses. In SIGARCH
Comput. Archit. News, 2014.
[234] Mohammad Agbarya, Idan Yaniv, Jayneel Gandhi, and Dan Tsafrir.
Predicting Execution Times with Partial Simulations in Virtual Memory Research: Why and How. In MICRO, 2020.
[235] J. Wawrzynek, M. Oskin, C. Kozyrakis, D. Chiou, D. A. Patterson,
and S.-L. Lu. Ramp: A research accelerator for multiple processors.
In EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech. Rep.
UCB/EECS-2006-158, 2006.
[236] D. Chiou, D. Sunwoo, J. Kim, N. A. Patil, W. Reinhart, and D. E.
Johnson. FPGA-Accelerated Simulation Technologies (FAST): Fast,
Full-System, Cycle-Accurate Simulators. In MICRO, 2007.
[237] M. Pellauer, M. Adler, M. Kinsy, A. Parashar, and J. Emer. Hasim:
FPGA-Based High-Detail Multicore Simulation Using Time-Division
Multiplexing. In HPCA, 2011.
[238] E. S. Chung, M. K. Papamichael, E. Nurvitadhi, J. C. Hoe, K. Mai, and
B. Falsafi. ProtoFlex: Towards Scalable, Full-System Multiprocessor
Simulations Using FPGAs. In ACM TRTS, 2009.
[239] Z. Tan, A. Waterman, R. Avizienis, Y. Lee, H. Cook, and D. Patterson.
RAMP Gold: An FPGA-based Architecture Simulator for Multiprocessors. In DAC, 2010.
[240] Sagar Karandikar, Howard Mao, Donggyu Kim, David Biancolin,
Alon Amid, Dayeol Lee, Nathan Pemberton, Emmanuel Amaro, Colin
Schmidt, Aditya Chopra, Qijing Huang, Kyle Kovacs, Borivoje Nikolic,
Randy Katz, Jonathan Bachrach, and Krste Asanović. FireSim: FPGAaccelerated Cycle-exact Scale-out System Simulation in the Public
Cloud. In ISCA, 2018.
[241] Nitin Agrawal, Leo Arulraj, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H.
Arpaci-Dusseau. Emulating Goliath Storage Systems with David. In
ACM Trans. Storage, 2012.
[242] Mark Mansi and Michael M. Swift. 0sim: Preparing System Software
for a World with Terabyte-scale Memories. In ASPLOS, 2020.
[243] Yang Wang, Manos Kapritsos, Lara Schmidt, Lorenzo Alvisi, and
Mike Dahlin. Exalt: Empowering Researchers to Evaluate LargeScale Storage Systems. In NSDI, 2014.

21

[258] Ashley Saulsbury, Fredrik Dahlgren, and Per Stenström. Recencybased TLB Preloading. In ISCA, 2000.
[259] Chandrashis Mazumdar, Prachatos Mitra, and Arkaprava Basu. Dead
Page and Dead Block Predictors: Cleaning TLBs and Caches Together.
In HPCA, 2021.
[260] Samira Mirbagher-Ajorpaz, Elba Garza, Gilles Pokam, and Daniel A.
Jiménez. CHiRP: Control-Flow History Reuse Prediction. In MICRO,
2020.
[261] Jagadish B. Kotra, Michael LeBeane, Mahmut T. Kandemir, and
Gabriel H. Loh. Increasing GPU Translation Reach by Leveraging
Under-Utilized On-Chip Resources. In MICRO, 2021.
[262] Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Large-Reach Memory Management Unit
Caches. In MICRO, 2013.
[263] Albert Esteve, Maria Engracia Gómez, and Antonio Robles. Exploiting
Parallelization On Address Translation: Shared Page Walk Cache. In
OMHI, 2014.
[264] Jayneel Gandhi, Arkaprava Basu, Mark D. Hill, and Michael M. Swift.
Efficient Memory Virtualization: Reducing Dimensionality of Nested
Page Walks. In MICRO, 2014.
[265] Binh Pham, Jan Vesely, Gabriel H Loh, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. Using TLB Speculation to Overcome Page Splintering in Virtual
Machines. Technical report, 2015.
[266] Ravi Bhargava, Benjamin Serebrin, Francesco Spadini, and Srilatha
Manne. Accelerating Two-Dimensional Page Walks for Virtualized
Systems. In ASPLOS, 2008.
[267] Zi Yan, Ján Veselỳ, Guilherme Cox, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee.
Hardware Translation Coherence for Virtualized Systems. In ISCA,
2017.
[268] Dimitrios Skarlatos, Umur Darbaz, Bhargava Gopireddy, Nam Sung
Kim, and Josep Torrellas. BabelFish: Fusing Address Translations for
Containers. In ISCA, 2020.
[269] Artemiy Margaritov, Dmitrii Ustiugov, Amna Shahab, and Boris Grot.
PTEMagnet: FIne-graIned Physical Memory Reservation for Faster
Page Walks in Public Clouds. In ASPLOS, 2021.
[270] Ashish Panwar, Reto Achermann, Arkaprava Basu, Abhishek Bhattacharjee, K Gopinath, and Jayneel Gandhi. Fast Local Page-tables
for Virtualized Numa Servers with vmitosis. In ASPLOS, 2021.

[244] Chang Hyun Park, Sanghoon Cha, Bokyeong Kim, Youngjin Kwon,
David Black-Schaffer, and Jaehyuk Huh. Perforated Page: Supporting
Fragmented Memory Allocation for Large Pages. In ISCA, 2020.
[245] Youngjin Kwon, Hangchen Yu, Simon Peter, Christopher J. Rossbach,
and Emmett Witchel. Coordinated and Efficient Huge Page Management with Ingens. In OSDI, 2016.
[246] Madhusudhan Talluri, Shing Kong, Mark D. Hill, and David A. Patterson. Tradeoffs in Supporting Two Page Sizes. In ISCA, 1992.
[247] Ashish Panwar, Aravinda Prasad, and K Gopinath. Making Huge
Pages Actually Useful. In ASPLOS, 2018.
[248] Ashish Panwar, Sorav Bansal, and K Gopinath. Hawkeye: Efficient
Fine-grained OS Support for Huge Pages. In ASPLOS, 2019.
[249] Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Joshua Landgraf, Vance Miller, Saugata
Ghose, Jayneel Gandhi, Christopher J. Rossbach, and Onur Mutlu.
Mosaic: A GPU Memory Manager with Application-Transparent
Support for Multiple Page Sizes. In MICRO, 2017.
[250] Zhen Fang, Lixin Zhang, J.B. Carter, W.C. Hsieh, and S.A. McKee.
Reevaluating Online Superpage Promotion with Hardware Support.
In HPCA, 2001.
[251] Mark Swanson, Leigh Stoller, and John Carter. Increasing TLB Reach
Using Superpages Backed By Shadow Memory. In ISCA, 1998.
[252] Yu Du, Miao Zhou, Bruce R Childers, Daniel Mossé, and Rami Melhem.
Supporting Superpages in Non-Contiguous Physical Memory. In
HPCA, 2015.
[253] Madhusudhan Talluri and Mark D. Hill. Surpassing the TLB Performance of Superpages with Less Operating System Support. In
ASPLOS, 1994.
[254] Mel Gorman and Patrick Healy. Supporting Superpage Allocation
Without Additional Hardware Support. In ISMM, 2008.
[255] Narayanan Ganapathy and Curt Schimmel. General Purpose Operating System Support for Multiple Page Sizes. In ATC, 1998.
[256] Georgios Vavouliotis, Lluc Alvarez, Boris Grot, Daniel Jiménez, and
Marc Casas. Morrigan: A Composite Instruction TLB Prefetcher. In
MICRO, 2021.
[257] Gokul B Kandiraju and Anand Sivasubramaniam. Going the Distance
for TLB Prefetching: An Application-driven Study. In ISCA, 2002.

22

