Virtuoso: Enabling Fast and Accurate
Virtual Memory Research via an Imitation-based
Operating System Simulation Methodology

arXiv:2403.04635v2 [cs.AR] 27 Mar 2025

Konstantinos Kanellopoulos1
Konstantinos Sgouras1
F. Nisa Bostanci1
1
1
Andreas Kosmas Kakolyris
Berkin Kerim Konar
Rahul Bera1
Mohammad Sadrosadati1
Rakesh Kumar 2
Nandita Vijaykumar 3
Onur Mutlu1
1 ETH Zürich

2 Norwegian University of Science and Technology

3 University of Toronto

simulation time overhead of only 20%, on top of four baseline
architectural simulators. The source code of Virtuoso is freely
available at https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/Virtuoso.

Abstract
The unprecedented growth in data demand from emerging
applications has turned virtual memory (VM) into a major
performance bottleneck. VM’s overheads are expected to
persist as memory requirements continue to increase. Researchers explore new hardware/OS co-designs to optimize
VM across diverse applications and systems. To evaluate
such designs, researchers rely on various simulation methodologies to model VM components. Unfortunately, current
simulation tools (i) either lack the desired accuracy in modeling VM’s software components or (ii) are too slow and
complex to prototype and evaluate schemes that span across
the hardware/software boundary.
We introduce Virtuoso, a new simulation framework that
enables quick and accurate prototyping and evaluation of
the software and hardware components of the VM subsystem.
The key idea of Virtuoso is to employ a lightweight userspace
OS kernel, called MimicOS, that (i) accelerates simulation
time by imitating only the desired kernel functionalities, (ii)
facilitates the development of new OS routines that imitate
real ones, using an accessible high-level programming interface, (iii) enables accurate and flexible evaluation of the
application- and system-level implications of VM after integrating Virtuoso to a desired architectural simulator.
In this work, we integrate Virtuoso into five diverse architectural simulators, each specializing in different aspects
of system design, and heavily enrich it with multiple stateof-the-art VM schemes. This way, we establish a common
ground for researchers to evaluate current VM designs and
to develop and test new ones. We demonstrate Virtuoso’s
flexibility and versatility by evaluating five diverse use cases,
yielding new insights into state-of-the-art VM techniques.
Our validation shows that Virtuoso ported on top of Sniper,
a state-of-the-art microarchitectural simulator, models (i) the
memory management unit of a real high-end server-grade
CPU with 82% accuracy, and (ii) the page fault latency of a
real Linux kernel with up to 79% accuracy. Consequently, Virtuoso models the IPC performance of a real high-end servergrade CPU with 21% higher accuracy than the baseline version of Sniper. Virtuoso’s accuracy benefits incur an average

1

Introduction

Virtual memory (VM) [1–23] is a cornerstone of modern
computing systems, enabling application-transparent physical memory management, isolation and data sharing. Contemporary applications (e.g., [24–45]) exhibit different characteristics that stress the VM subsystem. We classify these
workloads into two broad categories: (i) long-running workloads (i.e., execution time larger than 100s of seconds) [24, 28–
31, 33–35] with large data footprints and irregular memory
access patterns, that exhibit high address translation overheads, and (ii) short-running workloads (i.e., execution time
often lower than 1 second) [36–45] whose execution time
does not amortize the overheads of system software operations (e.g., physical memory allocation). Multiple prior works
and industrial studies [46–57] have shown that address translation in long-running workloads and memory allocation
in short-running workloads respectively account for up to
40% and 95% of the total execution time. As memory requirements continue to increase and systems transition to
larger physical address spaces [58] (e.g., via hybrid memory
systems with high-capacity non-volatile memories [59–64],
memory disaggregation [65–94]), the overheads associated
with VM operations are expected to increase.
To tackle these overheads, many research works take a
hardware/OS co-design approach and revisit core aspects
of VM such as page table structure [54, 95–103], virtualto-physical mapping [104–111], physical memory allocation
policy (e.g. transparent huge page mechanisms [112–116, 116,
117]) and Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) design [13, 118–
125]. Evaluating such VM designs is not straightforward. The
evaluation challenge primarily arises from the need to model
the interplay between both the OS and HW components
involved in VM. For example, in modern systems, the OS
manages the allocation of large pages, which directly affects
the effectiveness of the TLB [126–128], memory footprint

1

