Instruction-Aware Cooperative TLB and Cache
Replacement Policies
Dimitrios Chasapis∗

Georgios Vavouliotis∗

dimitrios.chasapis@bsc.es
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Barcelona, Spain

gvavou5@gmail.com
Zurich, Switzerland

Daniel A. Jiménez

Marc Casas

djimenez@acm.org
Texas A&M University
College Station, United States

marc.casas@bsc.es
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
Modern server and data center applications are characterized not only by large datasets, but also by large instruction footprints that incur frequent cache and Translation
Lookaside Buffer (TLB) misses due to instruction accesses.
Instruction TLB misses are particularly problematic as they
cause pipeline stalls that significantly harm performance.
This paper proposes cooperative last-level TLB (STLB) and
L2 cache (L2C) replacement policies targeting workloads
with large instruction footprints. We propose Instruction
Translation Prioritization (iTP), an STLB replacement policy
that maximizes the number of instruction hits in the STLB
at the expense of increasing data page walks. To compensate
for the increase in data page walks, we propose extended
Page Table Prioritization (xPTP), a new L2C replacement policy that amplifies the benefits of iTP by effectively reducing
L2C misses due to data page walks. Our proposal, iTP+xPTP,
combines iTP at STLB and xPTP at L2C. iTP+xPTP employs
an adaptive mechanism that switches between xPTP and
LRU policies at L2C based on the pressure placed on the virtual memory subsystem. Our proposal, iTP+xPTP, improves
single-core geometric mean performance by 18.9% over a
baseline that uses the LRU replacement policy at both STLB
and L2C across a set of contemporary server workloads. Under SMT co-location, the corresponding performance uplift
is 11.4%. Finally, we show that iTP+xPTP outperforms the
state-of-the-art STLB and cache replacement policies.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Virtual
memory; • Applied computing → Data centers.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal
use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25),
March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands, https://doi.org/10.1145/
3669940.3707247.

Keywords: virtual memory, address translation, translation
lookaside buffer, TLB management, replacement policy
ACM Reference Format:
Dimitrios Chasapis, Georgios Vavouliotis, Daniel A. Jiménez, and Marc
Casas. 2025. Instruction-Aware Cooperative TLB and Cache Replacement Policies. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707247

1

Introduction

Virtual memory based on paging is prevalent in contemporary computing systems. Each memory access in pagebased virtual memory systems requires translating a virtual address to a physical address. Translation Lookaside
Buffers (TLBs) mitigate address translation overheads by
storing the recently used virtual-to-physical mappings. Recent literature shows that frequent last-level TLB (STLB)
misses incur significant performance and energy overheads
[13, 15, 18, 25, 39, 47]. Prior work that reduces address translation overheads can be broadly classified in two categories:
i) techniques that reduce the number of STLB misses [16,
17, 36, 37, 62, 65, 66, 69, 70, 81, 87] and ii) techniques that
mitigate the latency cost of page walks [42, 53].
Modern server and data center applications are characterized not only by large datasets but also by large instruction
footprints [14, 39, 61, 88]. These large footprints incur frequent cache and STLB misses due to instruction accesses,
which constitute a major performance painpoint because
they cause frequent pipeline stalls. This problem is likely to
be exacerbated in the future since the instruction footprint of
server applications increases yearly by up to 30% [39, 52, 74].
To make matters worse, frequent STLB misses (for both data
and instruction accesses) also increase cache pressure since
* Both authors contributed equally to this research work.

