arXiv:2406.19580v2 [cs.AR] 9 Jun 2025

FRED: A Wafer-scale Fabric for 3D Parallel DNN Training
Saeed Rashidi∗

William Won

Sudarshan Srinivasan

saeed.rashidi@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

william.won@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

sudarshan.srinivasan@intel.com
Intel
Bangalore, Karnataka, India

Puneet Gupta

Tushar Krishna

puneetg@ucla.edu
UCLA
Los Angeles, California, USA

tushar@ece.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

Abstract
Wafer-scale systems are an emerging technology that tightly integrates high-end accelerator chiplets with high-speed wafer-scale
interconnects, enabling low-latency and high-bandwidth connectivity. This makes them a promising platform for deep neural network (DNN) training. However, current network-on-wafer topologies, such as 2D Meshes, lack the flexibility needed to support
various parallelization strategies effectively. In this paper, we propose Fred, a wafer-scale fabric architecture tailored to the unique
communication needs of DNN training. Fred creates a distributed
on-wafer topology with tiny microswitches, providing nonblocking connectivity for collective communications between arbitrary
groups of accelerators and enabling in-switch collective support.
Our results show that for sample parallelization strategies, Fred
can improve the average end-to-end training time of ResNet-152,
Transformer-17B, GPT-3, and Transformer-1T by 1.76×, 1.87×, 1.34×,
and 1.4×, respectively, compared to a baseline wafer-scale Mesh.

CCS Concepts
• Hardware → Emerging technologies; • Networks → Network
architectures; • Computer systems organization → Architectures.

Keywords
distributed training, wafer-scale platforms
ACM Reference Format:
Saeed Rashidi, William Won, Sudarshan Srinivasan, Puneet Gupta, and Tushar
Krishna. 2025. FRED: A Wafer-scale Fabric for 3D Parallel DNN Training. In Proceedings of The 52nd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (’ISCA 2025’). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/3695053.3731055

1

Introduction

DNN models are on an exponential growth curve. A recent study
shows that in less than two years, the compute and memory requirements for DNN training have increased by 1,800× and 1,500×,
respectively [58]. Distributing the training across multiple accelerators or neural processing units (NPUs) is a common practice
today to reduce the training time. However, one critical side effect
∗ The author is now at Meta: rashidi1saeed@meta.com

’ISCA 2025’, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
2025. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/3695053.3731055

of distributed training is the communication overhead between
NPUs to synchronize model gradients and/or activations, depending on the parallelization strategy. As the number of NPUs scales,
communication overhead increases, up to a point where it becomes
the dominant factor in distributed training latency [26, 27, 54, 55].
There are fundamental limits to the bandwidth that can be provided even by high-speed rack-scale fabrics (such as NVLink [33]),
and thus there has been a growing interest in platforms that integrate multiple NPUs together in the same package. Cerebras [10]
demonstrated one extreme incarnation of this idea in the form of a
monolithic wafer with NPUs connected to one another. More costand yield-effective approaches include silicon/organic interposerbased approaches [24, 59] or using Silicon Interconnect Fabric (SiIF), which bonds chiplets directly onto a full thickness silicon wafer
without needing a package [14, 47, 48]. In this work, we assume a
passive, interconnect-only wafer-scale substrate onto which chiplets
are bonded at fine pitch similar to Si-IF or TSMC-SoW [61]. This allows for heterogeneous integration of compute, memory, and network
chiplets from disparate technologies, unlike the monolithic Cerebras
approach.
While there is broad agreement on the scalability and bandwidth benefits that wafer-scale substrates can provide, the architecture of the fabric connecting the NPUs remains an open question. All wafer-scale accelerator proposals to date (e.g., Cerebras
CS2 [10], NVIDIA’s SIMBA [59], UCLA’s waferscale GPU [48],
Chiplet Cloud [49], Chen et al., TTO [31]) have implemented a
2D Mesh topology for the fabric. The choice of a Mesh is understandable. It is the most pervasive topology in many-core chips
given its ease of place-and-route and scalability and is the natural
choice on a wafer-scale substrate as well. However, we demonstrate
that the inherent blocking nature of the 2D Mesh topology is extremely
inefficient for DNN training communication use cases.
Communication in DNN training depends inherently on the
parallelism strategy being employed. Data-Parallel (DP) [27, 34],
Model-Parallel (MP) [26, 32], and Pipeline-Parallel (PP) [23, 40] are
the building blocks of any parallelism strategy. In DP, the DNN
model is replicated across NPUs and each NPU works on a different
set of training samples (i.e., minibatch). In MP, each DNN layer is
sharded across NPUs while they work on the same training samples. In PP, each NPU hosts a subset of DNN layers, and training
samples flow through the NPUs in a pipeline manner. 3D parallelism [41] utilizes all the aforementioned strategies by creating
different MP/DP/PP groups between NPUs. The optimal balance
between DP, MP, and PP is heavily dependent on the workload and

’ISCA 2025’, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

Rashidi et al.
Training
Workload

021

121

221

321

ion

3D Parallel
Strategy Search

Co-optimize compute time,
memory utilization and
communication volume

Device
Placement

Map training workers to
physical NPUs to minimize
network traﬃc and congestion

Collective
Algorithms

Eﬃcient topology-aware collective
routing algorithm to maximize BW
utilization and minimize congestion

Network Fabric

Provide flexibility to handle all
parallelization strategies eﬃciently

100

200

300

Di

000

me

ns

111 211 311
020 120 220 320
001 101 201 301
010 110 210 310
DP

PP Dimension

011

MP Dimension

Target DNN Model

Figure 1: HW-SW Co-Design Stack for Optimizing DNN training
communication. This work addresses the three phases highlighted
in red. The left part of the figure shows a sample logical view of
training workers in 3D parallelism. The parallelization strategy is
of size MP(4)-DP(3)-PP(2), meaning that there are 4/3/2 peer workers
for the MP/DP/PP dimension. Each worker is named with 3 digits,
representing the ID of the worker in the MP, DP, and PP dimensions,
respectively. Workers that are aligned along each dimension should
communicate for that respective dimension’s parallelization type.
For example, workers 000, 100, 200, and 300 should communicate
for MP type (i.e., activation/input gradient sync during forwardpass/back-propagation), while workers 300, 310, 320 should communicate for DP type (weight gradient sync during backpropagation).

Normalized Runtime

underlying platform and can significantly vary for different workload/platform configurations [26, 50]. Figure 1 shows an example of
a 3D parallelism strategy.
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

comp

exposed comm

Parallelization Strategy
Figure 2: The normalized computation/communication overhead
for various parallelization strategies (explained in Section 2) of
Transformer-17B, when running on top of the 2D Mesh topology (as
described in Section 6) that connects 20 NPUs on the wafer.

From a communication perspective, 3D parallelism requires executing multiple concurrent communication operations between NPUs
within the same MP/DP/PP group at different stages of distributed
training. Moreover, different parallelism strategies stress the compute and communication differently. This is quantified in Figure 2.
As the figure shows, high communication overhead can result in
the total training overhead of compute-efficient strategies being
greater than that of less compute-efficient strategies (e.g., MP(20)DP(1)-PP(1) vs. MP(5)-DP(4)-PP(1)). Other than the communication
volume which is determined by the workload, the main purpose
of such high network overhead in Figure 2 is the inefficient use
of network resources in the baseline topology. This is mainly because: (i) for the majority of the comm operations, only half or
less than half of the NPU links get activated (discussed in detail in
Section 3.2.4), (ii) network contention between MP/DP/PP parallel
groups (discussed in detail in Section 3.2.2). The full list of baseline
topology challenges is discussed in Section 3.2.

In summary, an optimal wafer-scale fabric for distributed DNN
training should meet the following three needs:
(1) Handle multiple non-blocking collective communications
with minimum congestion.
(2) Be efficient for all 3D parallelism configurations.
(3) Provide high-BW connectivity between NPUs.
In this work, we propose Fred, a wafer-scale fabric with Flexible REduction-Distribution feature for supporting arbitrary 3D
parallelism. Fred includes: (i) a novel topology with switches that
provide native support for reduction and broadcast for bandwidth
amplification, (ii) a collective routing algorithm with non-blocking
support, and (iii) a device placement algorithm to minimize congestion. We deploy Fred over a wafer-scale substrate [47]. Each NPU
in our architecture is a hybrid integration of high-end compute
chiplets and 3D-stack DRAM chiplets (analogous to H100 [45]).
We also discuss solutions to physically layout and scale the Fred
topology over a wafer substrate.
To the best of our knowledge, Fred is the first wafer-scale fabric proposal tailored for DNN training, that can efficiently support
multiple concurrent collectives for hybrid parallelization strategies
(e.g., 3D parallelism). Hence, Fred enables the compiler to consider
any type of parallelization strategy without any concern about how
efficiently they can be executed on the network. To summarize:
• We motivate the challenges with designing a wafer-scale
fabric for 3D parallelism (Section 3).
• We propose Fred, a novel network fabric that includes several innovative features: a switch fabric with flexible reductiondistribution trees connected via a scalable topology (Section 4), and a novel routing algorithm to route multiple collectives concurrently, along with a congestion-aware device
placement policy for 3D parallelism (Section 5).
• We demonstrate how Fred can be implemented as a waferscale fabric (Section 6).
• We compare Fred with baseline fabrics for some sample
workloads and parallelization strategies (Section 8).
Our results show that Fred can improve the average end-toend training time of ResNet-152, Transformer-17B, GPT-3, and
Transformer-1T by 1.76×, 1.87×, 1.34×, and 1.4×, respectively, when
compared to the baseline 2D Mesh.

2 Background
2.1 Collective Communication Patterns
Although DNN models can be highly diverse, most of their communication during distributed training can be handled through
collective patterns [27]. Depending on the model type and parallelization strategy, different types of collectives may be needed to
synchronize on activations/gradients during forward-pass/backpropagation [55]. Figure 3 shows the mathematical implication of
the most common collective patterns between three workers. During Reduce-Scatter, workers communicate in such a way that, at
the end, each worker has a portion of globally reduced data. In AllGather, each worker broadcasts its local data to all other workers.
All-Reduce is the most common pattern in distributed training [27]
and can be thought of as a Reduce-Scatter followed by an All-Gather.
In Reduce, multiple NPUs participate in reducing data, and the result
is stored only on one NPU, while Gather collects the data from all

