Minsu Kim∗

Seongmin Hong∗

RyeoWook Ko

KAIST
mskim@casys.kaist.ac.kr

HyperAccel
sm.hong@hyperaccel.ai

KAIST
ryeowookko@kaist.ac.kr

Soongyu Choi

Hunjong Lee

Junsoo Kim

KAIST
soongyu1291@kaist.ac.kr

HyperAccel
hj.lee@hyperaccel.ai

HyperAccel
js.kim@hyperaccel.ai

Joo-Young Kim

Jongse Park

HyperAccel
jy.kim@hyperaccel.ai

KAIST
jspark@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Eﬀec%ve Capacity

Modern Large Language Model (LLM) serving system batches multiple requests to achieve high throughput, while batching attention
operations is challenging, rendering memory bandwidth a critical bottleneck. Today, to mitigate this issue, the community relies
on high-end GPUs with multiple high-bandwidth memory (HBM)
channels. Unfortunately, HBM’s high bandwidth often comes at the
expense of limited memory capacity, necessitating systems to scale,
which reduces core utilization and increases costs. Moreover, recent
advancements enabling longer contexts for LLMs have substantially
increased the key-value (KV) cache size, further intensifying the
pressures on memory capacity. To lower the pressure, the literature
has explored KV cache quantization techniques, which commonly
use low bitwidth (e.g., INT4) for most values, selectively using
higher bitwidth (e.g., FP16) for outlier values. While this approach
helps achieve high accuracy and low bitwidth simultaneously, it
comes with the limitation that the cost for online outlier detection
is excessively high, negating the advantages of quantization.
Inspired by these insights, we propose Oaken, an acceleration
solution that achieves high accuracy and high performance simultaneously through co-designing algorithm and hardware. To effectively find a sweet spot in the accuracy-performance trade-off
space of KV cache quantization, Oaken employs an online-offline
hybrid approach, setting outlier thresholds offline, which are then
used to determine the quantization scale online. To translate the
proposed algorithmic technique into tangible performance gains,
Oaken also comes with custom quantization/dequantization engines and memory management units that can be integrated with
any LLM accelerators. We built an Oaken accelerator on top of
an LLM accelerator, LPU, and conducted a comprehensive evaluation. Our experiments show that for a batch size of 256, Oaken
achieves up to 1.58× throughput improvement over NVIDIA A100
GPU, incurring a minimal accuracy loss of only 0.54% on average,
compared to state-of-the-art KV cache quantization techniques.

Dedicated accelerator
GPU
GPU with quan%za%on
PIM/PNM
Oaken

Oaken

CXL-PNM [53]
Tender [36]
LPU [48]
QServe [42]
Atom [86]
KVQuant [23]
TransPIM [88]
A.Acc [52]
A100 [49]
DFX [22]
TPUv4 [29]
NeuPIMs [21]

Throughput

arXiv:2503.18599v1 [cs.AR] 24 Mar 2025

Oaken: Fast and Efficient LLM Serving with
Online-Offline Hybrid KV Cache Quantization

Eﬀec%ve Bandwidth

Figure 1: Existing solutions for LLM inference serving systems plotted on the bandwidth-capacity trade-off space. The
“effective bandwidth” and “effective capacity” represent the
scale of data that can be transmitted to/from and stored on
memory, respectively. We also delineate their corresponding
throughputs (i.e., tokens/sec) using the colors presented on a
1D heatmap on the right side.

Keywords
Accelerator; Large Language Models (LLM); Serving; Batched Inference; Quantization; Key-Value (KV) Cache

1

Introduction

The recent advent of large language models (LLMs) has significantly impacted the computing industry. Almost every sector of the
modern economy is exploring the adoption of LLMs, with many already actively using them for various applications. Most real-world
applications rely on hyperscaler-provided LLM serving systems
because on-premise LLM deployment requires prohibitive costs.
As LLM inferencing is for multi-tenant environments, the serving systems batch multiple requests to parallelize the inference
computation [12, 14, 33, 37, 50, 64, 77]. While batching promises a
significant throughput boost for operations where operand matrices
can be shared across requests on GPUs and other AI accelerators,
attention layers in transformer-based LLMs consist of un-batchable
operations with request-specific, un-sharable operands, lowering
hardware utilization. As the un-batchable operations cannot exploit
on-chip data reuse, they produce enormous memory read, causing
memory bandwidth to become the key system bottleneck.

∗ Co-first authors who contributed equally to this work.

’ISCA 2025’, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
2024. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1

’ISCA 2025’, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

Minsu Kim, Seongmin Hong, RyeoWook Ko, Soongyu Choi, Hunjong Lee, Junsoo Kim, Joo-Young Kim, and Jongse Park

Additionally, request batching in LLM inference has another
resource implication. LLMs generate key-value activation and cache
them in memory for computation reuse, often called KV cache. As
this KV cache is not shared across different user requests, the large
batch size is directly translated into a large KV cache size, requiring
massive memory capacity. Furthermore, as KV cache size scales
linearly with the sequence length, the recent trend of supporting
very long sequences (e.g., 2 million tokens [76]) places even greater
pressure on memory capacity.
Consequently, LLM serving systems require both high bandwidth
and high capacity to enable fast inferencing. This resource demand
aligns with the immense user demand for LLM services, making
it challenging for service providers to build cost-effective LLM
serving systems. Existing solutions often choose to trade-off one
resource for the other, as visualized in Figure 1. Below, we classify
the existing solutions into the following three categories:
(1) Prioritizing bandwidth over capacity: Currently, using HBMequipped GPUs is the de-facto standard solution for LLM inference processing [29, 45, 49]. While this approach achieves
massive bandwidth, it often compromises capacity, with insufficient capacity forcing systems to scale out, which not only
reduces core utilization but also increases the cost of building
the system.
(2) Leveraging PIM and/or PNM: Even with HBMs, LLM inferencing systems still face bandwidth bottlenecks. To address this
challenge, recent works have explored the near-data processing
(NDP) paradigm, leveraging PIM [21, 52, 59] and/or PNM [53].
While these approaches mitigate the bandwidth bottleneck,
their inherent nature requires further reductions in memory
capacity, limiting their viability as a fundamental solution.
(3) Exploring LLM quantization strategies: One fundamental
strategy for jointly addressing the conflicting objectives is to
minimize the memory footprint required for LLM inferencing.
To achieve this goal, a large body of prior work [10, 18, 23,
31, 32, 34, 41, 42, 44, 75, 78, 79, 86] have recently developed
LLM-targeted quantization techniques. While these techniques
successfully achieve significant reductions in bitwidth, they
often prioritize minimizing bitwidth over effectively translating
these reductions into practical inferencing speedups.
Alone, none of the solutions is sufficient for building fast and efficient LLM serving systems, which motivates us to develop an acceleration solution, namely Oaken. By jointly leveraging algorithmic
and hardware techniques, Oaken achieves otherwise unattainable
levels of effective bandwidth and capacity, resulting in substantially
higher throughput than alternatives, as shown in Figure 1. Oaken
comprises (1) Algorithmic technique: an online-offline hybrid
KV cache quantization technique, and (2) Hardware technique:
the hardware incarnations of the proposed algorithms, including
quantization/dequantization engines and memory management
units that can be integrated with any existing LLM accelerators.
Oaken makes the following contributions:
(1) Online-offline hybrid KV cache quantization: Many of the
recently-proposed KV cache quantization techniques commonly
use low bitwidth (e.g., INT4) for most values, while selectively
using higher bitwidth (e.g., FP16) for outlier values [15, 20, 23,
34, 80, 86]. While this approach achieves high accuracy and
low bitwidth, the prohibitively high cost of online threshold

calculation or mixed-precision computation renders it nearly
impractical for real-world use cases. Thus, there is a critical
need for a cost-effective solution to identify thresholds that
distinguish outliers from inliers, enabling the translation of
KV cache quantization into tangible speedups. To achieve this
goal, Oaken employs an online-offline hybrid approach, where
data-agnostic outlier thresholds are determined at offline and
subsequently applied to set the quantization scale at online.
Furthermore, Oaken introduces a quantization loss mitigation
technique that shifts values toward a smaller range, converting
outliers into inliers prior to quantization. Finally, Oaken stores
the quantized values by using dense tensors for inliers and
fusing sparse outliers into the dense tensors.
(2) Quantization-aware hardware modules for LLM accelerators: We devise custom quantization/dequantization engines
and memory management units, which are aware of the proposed quantization algorithm. These hardware modules can be
integrated with any existing LLM accelerators such as GPUs,
NPUs, and LLM-customized ones [22, 24, 53, 82]. We place these
modules in the DMA unit that is commonly present in modern
LLM accelerators. In designing the memory management unit
(MMU), the challenge is to achieve the maximal bandwidth,
which is close to the physical limit, while effectively laying
out the dense and sparse matrices in memory. We design the
MMU with two management tables for dense and sparse data,
respectively, to handle virtual-to-physical address mappings
and manage the single address space at page granularity. This
design maximizes memory bandwidth utilization while avoiding fragmentation and burst order issues.
To evaluate the effectiveness of Oaken, we use eight different LLMs that include OPT [84], Llama2 [66], Mistral [26], and
Mixtral [27], with varying sizes. We use Wikitext, PIQA, Winogrande, and Hellaswag datasets, which are widely used in prior
works [11, 23, 32, 34, 38, 42, 73, 86, 87]. We synthesize the SystemVerilog RTL code of our accelerator in TSMC 28nm technology
using Synopsys Design Compiler, which offers the area information
of each component in the accelerator. Our experimental results
report that compared to NVIDIA A100 using state-of-the-art KV
cache quantization techniques, Oaken offers up to 1.58× throughput speedup, owing to the bitwidth reduction that reaches up to
70.0%. We achieve this speedup by only introducing a modest 0.87%
accuracy degradation, which demonstrates the algorithmic robustness of our KV cache quantization technique. Furthermore, Oaken
modules incur only 8.21% area overhead, which is negligible given
the significant performance benefits they enable. These advantages
demonstrate that Oaken achieves the dual objectives of bandwidth
and capacity, representing an important step toward building fast
and cost-effective LLM inference serving systems.

2 Background
2.1 A Primer on LLM Inference
As illustrated in Figure 2(a), inference of large language model is
mainly divided into two phases: the prefill phase and the generation
phase [4, 8, 26, 66, 84]. The prefill phase takes input tokens and
passes them through decoder layers to generate a single output
2

