Finesse: An Agile Design Framework for Pairing-based
Cryptography via Software/Hardware Co-Design
Tianwei Pan∗
Beihang University
Beijing, China
pantw@buaa.edu.cn
Tianao Dai∗
Beihang University
Beijing, China
daitianao@buaa.edu.cn
Jianlei Yang†
Beihang University
Beijing, China
jianlei@buaa.edu.cn
Hongbin Jing
Beihang University
Beijing, China
hongbin@buaa.edu.cn
Yang Su
Beihang University
Beijing, China
buaayangsu@buaa.edu.cn
Zeyu Hao
Beihang University
Beijing, China
withinlover@buaa.edu.cn
Xiaotao Jia
Beihang University
Beijing, China
jiaxt@buaa.edu.cn
Chunming Hu
Beihang University
Beijing, China
hucm@buaa.edu.cn
Weisheng Zhao
Beihang University
Beijing, China
weisheng.zhao@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
Pairing-based cryptography (PBC) is crucial in modern crypto-
graphic applications. With the rapid advancement of adversarial
research and the growing diversity of application requirements,
PBC accelerators need regular updates in algorithms, parameter
configurations, and hardware design. However, traditional design
methodologies face significant challenges, including prolonged de-
sign cycles, difficulties in balancing performance and flexibility, and
insufficient support for potential architectural exploration.
To address these challenges, we introduce Finesse, an agile
design framework based on co-design methodology. Finesse lever-
ages a co-optimization cycle driven by a specialized compiler and
a multi-granularity hardware simulator, enabling both optimized
performance metrics and effective design space exploration. Fur-
thermore, Finesse adopts a modular design flow to significantly
shorten design cycles, while its versatile abstraction ensures flexi-
bility across various curve families and hardware architectures.
Finesse offers flexibility, efficiency, and rapid prototyping, com-
paring with previous frameworks. With compilation times reduced
to minutes, Finesse enables faster iteration cycles and stream-
lined hardware-software co-design. Experiments on popular curves
demonstrate its effectiveness, achieving 34× improvement in through-
put and 6.2× increase in area efficiency compared to previous flexi-
ble frameworks, while outperforming state-of-the-art non-flexible
ASIC designs with a 3× gain in throughput and 3.2× improvement
in area efficiency.
Keywords
Agile design framework, pairing-based cryptography, hardware
accelerator, software/hardware co-design
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author is Jianlei Yang. Email: jianlei@buaa.edu.cn.
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 62072019), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. L243031),
and the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFB4503704 and
2024YFB4505601).
The Finesse framework is avaiable at https://github.com/BUAA-CI-LAB/Finesse.
1 Introduction
Bilinear pairing, since its formulation in modern cryptography, has
been a crucial primitive for building advanced cryptographic pro-
tocols and systems. Pairings enable efficient schemes for identity-
based encryption [1], attribute-based encryption [2], short signa-
ture [3], SNARKs such as KZG [4] and Groth16 [5]. As data security
and privacy gain increasing attention, pairing-based cryptogra-
phy plays a significant role in this context, safeguarding user data
and underpinning the trust and reliability of modern digital in-
frastructures. Despite its benefits, pairing comes with a significant
computational cost. While traditional signature schemes offer a
latency of around 20 µs on desktop CPUs, pairing computations are
typically 2 orders of magnitude longer [6]. Application needs for
pairing have motivated researchers to embark on the exploration
of efficient pairing acceleration techniques, targeting platforms
ranging from CPUs [6, 7], GPUs [8], to server-side FPGAs [9] and
ASIC [10]. Among these, FPGAs and ASICs excel primarily due to
their support for domain-specific designs [11], enabling customized
datapaths and logic units that achieve low latency and high resource
efficiency in terms of area and power for pairing accelerators.
However, research in this area faces several critical challenges, as
illustrated in Figure 1. The security level of pairings is not static; it
diminishes as attack methods improve and as computational power
advances [12–15]. The growing diversity of application require-
ments in pairing-based cryptography (PBC) necessitates iterative
updates to maintain security and performance standards. This on-
going need for adaptation gives rise to challenge ❶: the PBC
hardware re-engineering costs.
Existing works with high performance efficiency are designed
with specific pairing parameters in mind. While these designs
achieve good results, they also lead to high re-engineering costs.
On the other hand, works with higher flexibility suffer from low
performance due to a lack of parallelism in their architecture, and
their flexibility is constrained by the specific hardware implemen-
tation (e.g. difficulty supporting curves with larger bit widths),
which also results in unavoidable re-engineering costs. In summary,
arXiv:2509.10051v1
[cs.AR]
12
Sep
2025
Tianwei Pan, Tianao Dai, Jianlei Yang, Hongbin Jing, Yang Su, Zeyu Hao, Xiaotao Jia, Chunming Hu, and Weisheng Zhao
Long & Expensive
Design Cost
Attack
#EA6F50 #9CAB68 #9A3902 #395F62 #FECF4F #5
#FB8B02
Security Level (bit)
128
100
80 192
RSA1024 ECC256
BLS381
SHA1
Comput. Power
BN254
RSA2048
Security Demands Increasing Algorithm Complexity
Iteration Requirements Acceleration Needs
Pairing-Based Crypto.
Design Space
Complexity
❸
Flexibility Versus
Performance
❷
❶
Domain Specific Design
Modular
ALU
Memory
Controller
Updating Security
Customized
Design
Agility
Demands
p Adapt to New Curve
p Larger k or log p
p More Comput. Cost
Comput.
Bottleneck
High cost
Operations
Figure 1: The challenges of PBC accelerator design.
adapting existing works to meet the increasing security demands
while maintaining high performance requires considerable repeti-
tive architectural design work. In fact, this constitutes challenge ❷:
the absence of an efficient abstraction system that provides
unified support for arbitrary pairing curves. Introducing such
an abstraction can decouple the design process, thus enhancing
both the design flexibility and performance potential. However, it
also brings challenge ❸: hierarchical operator variants and
architecture co-design complexity. The interdependence among
software algorithms, field operator choices (arithmetic method se-
lections), and hardware configurations creates a complex design
space. Optimized operator variants shows different speed compar-
ision results on different hardware architectures. Existing frame-
works often overlook this complexity, resulting in lost opportunities
for optimization and adaptability[9, 10, 16–18]. Addressing these
challenges requires a comprehensive understanding of the design
space to enable effective design and improvement of PBC systems.
In this paper, we introduce Finesse, an agile design framework
for PBC. Central to its methodology is the utilization of an ab-
straction system. This abstraction framework bridges high-level
algorithms and hardware designs through clear representations
and optimized mappings, providing unified support for arbitrary
pairing curves in response to increasing security demands.
Through the expressive abstraction system, Finesse’s design
flow has integrated a parameterized hardware architecture, an ad-
vanced compiler and a simulator to form an effective co-design
cycle, enabling simple design space exploration within the complex
design space.
The results from the Finesse framework are significant. Compre-
hensive evaluations show substantial performance improvements,
achieving 34× throughput and 6.2× slice efficiency compared to
previous flexible frameworks, and 3× throughput and 3.2× area
efficiency over state-of-the-art ASIC accelerators. Finesse com-
piles code in minutes, accelerating the development cycle while
ensuring that the resulting accelerators are robust and optimized
for the evolving demands of modern cryptography.
Table 1: Symbols and notations in pairing calculation.
Notation Description
𝑝 size of base field
𝑘 embedding degree of curve
𝑟 pairing group order
F𝑝 base prime field of size 𝑝
F𝑝𝑘 extension field of size 𝑝𝑘 , 𝑘-th extension of F𝑝
𝐸[𝐹] curve group, point coordinates in field 𝐹
G1 pairing 1st source group (𝐸[F𝑝])
G2 pairing 2nd source group (𝐸[F𝑝𝑘 ] or 𝐸′ [F𝑝𝑘/6 ])
G𝑇 pairing target group (F𝑝𝑘 )
ℓ𝑄1,𝑄2 (𝑃) (tangent) line function
𝑒(𝑃,𝑄) pairing function, G1 × G2 → G𝑇
M,S,A,B multiplication, squaring, addition, adjunction
PA,PD point addition, point doubling
Table 2: Examples of pairing-friendly curves.
Curve
Param. (bit) Security
log |𝑡| log𝑝 log𝑟 𝑘 log𝑝 (bit)
BN254 62 254 254 3039 100
BN462 114 462 462 5535 130
BN638 158 638 638 7647 153
BLS12-381 64 381 255 4569 123
BLS12-446 75 446 299 5352 130
BLS12-638 109 638 427 7656 148
BLS24-509 51 509 408 12202 192
To summarize, this paper makes the following key contributions:
• We propose the Finesse design framework for pairing-
based cryptography, enhancing agility in accelerator design
by automating significant portions of the lengthy algorithm-
to-hardware flow.
• We developed an abstraction system that includes IR, ISA
and hardware models to support the framework.
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to incorporate
co-design mechanism into such a framework, allowing
for the effective exploration of the complex relationship
within the design space.
• We presented a comprehensive evaluation of Finesse on a
prototype implementation, focusing on five key aspects of
the framework: accelerator efficiency, framework scalabil-
ity, compilation, co-design, and agility.
2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Pairing Calculation Panorama
Pairing is a bivariate function satisfying linearity in each of its
arguments independently. Optimal Ate pairing [19] over elliptic
curve is the de facto standard of pairing construction technique
in the cryptography community, surpassing Weil pairing and Tate
pairing [20] due to its computational efficiency. The optimal Ate
pairing 𝑒(𝑃,𝑄) : G1 × G2 → G𝑇 for curve E has a complex general
