Finesse: An Agile Design Framework for Pairing-based
Cryptography via Software/Hardware Co-Design
Tianwei Pan∗

Beihang University
Beijing, China
pantw@buaa.edu.cn

arXiv:2509.10051v1 [cs.AR] 12 Sep 2025

Hongbin Jing

Beihang University
Beijing, China
hongbin@buaa.edu.cn

Xiaotao Jia

Beihang University
Beijing, China
jiaxt@buaa.edu.cn

Tianao Dai∗

Beihang University
Beijing, China
daitianao@buaa.edu.cn

Yang Su

Beihang University
Beijing, China
buaayangsu@buaa.edu.cn

Chunming Hu

Beihang University
Beijing, China
hucm@buaa.edu.cn

Jianlei Yang†

Beihang University
Beijing, China
jianlei@buaa.edu.cn

Zeyu Hao

Beihang University
Beijing, China
withinlover@buaa.edu.cn

Weisheng Zhao

Beihang University
Beijing, China
weisheng.zhao@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

1

Pairing-based cryptography (PBC) is crucial in modern cryptographic applications. With the rapid advancement of adversarial
research and the growing diversity of application requirements,
PBC accelerators need regular updates in algorithms, parameter
configurations, and hardware design. However, traditional design
methodologies face significant challenges, including prolonged design cycles, difficulties in balancing performance and flexibility, and
insufficient support for potential architectural exploration.
To address these challenges, we introduce Finesse, an agile
design framework based on co-design methodology. Finesse leverages a co-optimization cycle driven by a specialized compiler and
a multi-granularity hardware simulator, enabling both optimized
performance metrics and effective design space exploration. Furthermore, Finesse adopts a modular design flow to significantly
shorten design cycles, while its versatile abstraction ensures flexibility across various curve families and hardware architectures.
Finesse offers flexibility, efficiency, and rapid prototyping, comparing with previous frameworks. With compilation times reduced
to minutes, Finesse enables faster iteration cycles and streamlined hardware-software co-design. Experiments on popular curves
demonstrate its effectiveness, achieving 34× improvement in throughput and 6.2× increase in area efficiency compared to previous flexible frameworks, while outperforming state-of-the-art non-flexible
ASIC designs with a 3× gain in throughput and 3.2× improvement
in area efficiency.

Bilinear pairing, since its formulation in modern cryptography, has
been a crucial primitive for building advanced cryptographic protocols and systems. Pairings enable efficient schemes for identitybased encryption [1], attribute-based encryption [2], short signature [3], SNARKs such as KZG [4] and Groth16 [5]. As data security
and privacy gain increasing attention, pairing-based cryptography plays a significant role in this context, safeguarding user data
and underpinning the trust and reliability of modern digital infrastructures. Despite its benefits, pairing comes with a significant
computational cost. While traditional signature schemes offer a
latency of around 20 µs on desktop CPUs, pairing computations are
typically 2 orders of magnitude longer [6]. Application needs for
pairing have motivated researchers to embark on the exploration
of efficient pairing acceleration techniques, targeting platforms
ranging from CPUs [6, 7], GPUs [8], to server-side FPGAs [9] and
ASIC [10]. Among these, FPGAs and ASICs excel primarily due to
their support for domain-specific designs [11], enabling customized
datapaths and logic units that achieve low latency and high resource
efficiency in terms of area and power for pairing accelerators.
However, research in this area faces several critical challenges, as
illustrated in Figure 1. The security level of pairings is not static; it
diminishes as attack methods improve and as computational power
advances [12–15]. The growing diversity of application requirements in pairing-based cryptography (PBC) necessitates iterative
updates to maintain security and performance standards. This ongoing need for adaptation gives rise to challenge ❶: the PBC
hardware re-engineering costs.
Existing works with high performance efficiency are designed
with specific pairing parameters in mind. While these designs
achieve good results, they also lead to high re-engineering costs.
On the other hand, works with higher flexibility suffer from low
performance due to a lack of parallelism in their architecture, and
their flexibility is constrained by the specific hardware implementation (e.g. difficulty supporting curves with larger bit widths),
which also results in unavoidable re-engineering costs. In summary,

Keywords
Agile design framework, pairing-based cryptography, hardware
accelerator, software/hardware co-design
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.

† Corresponding author is Jianlei Yang. Email: jianlei@buaa.edu.cn.
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 62072019), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. L243031),
and the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFB4503704 and
2024YFB4505601).
The Finesse framework is avaiable at https://github.com/BUAA-CI-LAB/Finesse.

Introduction

#FECF4F #FB8B02 #5

#9CAB68
#9A3902
#395F62
Tianwei Pan, Tianao Dai, Jianlei Yang, Hongbin #EA6F50
Jing, Yang Su, Zeyu
Hao, Xiaotao
Jia, Chunming
Hu, and Weisheng Zhao
Table 1: Symbols and notations in pairing calculation.
Security Demands Increasing
SHA1
RSA1024

BN254
RSA2048

Algorithm Complexity

BLS381
ECC256

Attack

128

192

Pairing-Based Crypto.
High cost
Operations

Comput. Power
80

100

Comput.
Bottleneck

Security Level (bit)
Iteration Requirements

Acceleration Needs

Updating Security

Agility
Demands

p Adapt to New Curve
p Larger k or log p
p More Comput. Cost

❶ Long & Expensive
Design Cost

Customized
Design

❷

Flexibility Versus
Performance

Domain Specific Design
Memory
Controller

❸

Modular
ALU

Design Space
Complexity

Figure 1: The challenges of PBC accelerator design.
adapting existing works to meet the increasing security demands
while maintaining high performance requires considerable repetitive architectural design work. In fact, this constitutes challenge ❷:
the absence of an efficient abstraction system that provides
unified support for arbitrary pairing curves. Introducing such
an abstraction can decouple the design process, thus enhancing
both the design flexibility and performance potential. However, it
also brings challenge ❸: hierarchical operator variants and
architecture co-design complexity. The interdependence among
software algorithms, field operator choices (arithmetic method selections), and hardware configurations creates a complex design
space. Optimized operator variants shows different speed comparision results on different hardware architectures. Existing frameworks often overlook this complexity, resulting in lost opportunities
for optimization and adaptability[9, 10, 16–18]. Addressing these
challenges requires a comprehensive understanding of the design
space to enable effective design and improvement of PBC systems.
In this paper, we introduce Finesse, an agile design framework
for PBC. Central to its methodology is the utilization of an abstraction system. This abstraction framework bridges high-level
algorithms and hardware designs through clear representations
and optimized mappings, providing unified support for arbitrary
pairing curves in response to increasing security demands.
Through the expressive abstraction system, Finesse’s design
flow has integrated a parameterized hardware architecture, an advanced compiler and a simulator to form an effective co-design
cycle, enabling simple design space exploration within the complex
design space.
The results from the Finesse framework are significant. Comprehensive evaluations show substantial performance improvements,
achieving 34× throughput and 6.2× slice efficiency compared to
previous flexible frameworks, and 3× throughput and 3.2× area
efficiency over state-of-the-art ASIC accelerators. Finesse compiles code in minutes, accelerating the development cycle while
ensuring that the resulting accelerators are robust and optimized
for the evolving demands of modern cryptography.

Notation

Description

𝑝
𝑘
𝑟
F𝑝
F𝑝𝑘
𝐸 [𝐹 ]
G1
G2
G𝑇
ℓ𝑄 1 ,𝑄 2 (𝑃)
𝑒 (𝑃, 𝑄)
M,S,A,B
PA,PD

size of base field
embedding degree of curve
pairing group order
base prime field of size 𝑝
extension field of size 𝑝 𝑘 , 𝑘-th extension of F𝑝
curve group, point coordinates in field 𝐹
pairing 1st source group (𝐸 [F𝑝 ])
pairing 2nd source group (𝐸 [F𝑝𝑘 ] or 𝐸 ′ [F𝑝𝑘/6 ])
pairing target group (F𝑝𝑘 )
(tangent) line function
pairing function, G1 × G2 → G𝑇
multiplication, squaring, addition, adjunction
point addition, point doubling

Table 2: Examples of pairing-friendly curves.
Curve
BN254
BN462
BN638
BLS12-381
BLS12-446
BLS12-638
BLS24-509

log |𝑡 |
62
114
158
64
75
109
51

Param. (bit)
log 𝑝 log 𝑟 𝑘 log 𝑝
254
462
638
381
446
638
509

254
462
638
255
299
427
408

3039
5535
7647
4569
5352
7656
12202

Security
(bit)
100
130
153
123
130
148
192

To summarize, this paper makes the following key contributions:
• We propose the Finesse design framework for pairingbased cryptography, enhancing agility in accelerator design
by automating significant portions of the lengthy algorithmto-hardware flow.
• We developed an abstraction system that includes IR, ISA
and hardware models to support the framework.
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to incorporate
co-design mechanism into such a framework, allowing
for the effective exploration of the complex relationship
within the design space.
• We presented a comprehensive evaluation of Finesse on a
prototype implementation, focusing on five key aspects of
the framework: accelerator efficiency, framework scalability, compilation, co-design, and agility.

2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Pairing Calculation Panorama
Pairing is a bivariate function satisfying linearity in each of its
arguments independently. Optimal Ate pairing [19] over elliptic
curve is the de facto standard of pairing construction technique
in the cryptography community, surpassing Weil pairing and Tate
pairing [20] due to its computational efficiency. The optimal Ate
pairing 𝑒 (𝑃, 𝑄) : G1 × G2 → G𝑇 for curve E has a complex general

