Need for zkSpeed:
Accelerating HyperPlonk for Zero-Knowledge Proofs

arXiv:2504.06211v1 [cs.AR] 8 Apr 2025

Alhad Daftardar

Jianqiao Mo

Joey Ah-kiow

ajd9396@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

jm8782@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

ja4844@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

Benedikt Bünz

Ramesh Karri

Siddharth Garg

bb@nyu.edu
NYU Courant
Manhattan, NY, USA

rkarri@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

sg175@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

Brandon Reagen
bjr5@nyu.edu
NYU Tandon
Brooklyn, NY, USA

Abstract
(Preprint) Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) are rapidly gaining importance in privacy-preserving and verifiable computing. ZKPs
enable a proving party to prove the truth of a statement to a verifying party without revealing anything else. ZKPs have applications
in blockchain technologies, verifiable machine learning, and electronic voting, but have yet to see widespread adoption due to the
computational complexity of the proving process. Recent works
have accelerated the key primitives of state-of-the-art ZKP protocols on GPU and ASIC. However, the protocols accelerated thus far
face one of two challenges: they either require a trusted setup for
each application, or they generate larger proof sizes with higher
verification costs, limiting their applicability in scenarios with numerous verifiers or strict verification time constraints. This work
presents an accelerator, zkSpeed, for HyperPlonk, a state-of-theart ZKP protocol that supports both one-time, universal setup and
small proof sizes for typical ZKP applications in publicly verifiable, consensus-based systems. We accelerate the entire protocol,
including two major primitives: SumCheck and Multi-scalar Multiplications (MSMs). We develop a full-chip architecture using 366.46
mm2 and 2 TB/s of bandwidth to accelerate the entire proof generation process, achieving geometric mean speedups of 801× over
CPU baselines.

1

Introduction

Zero knowledge proofs enable a prover to produce a certificate
or proof that some computation (possibly with secret inputs) was
performed correctly. The proof itself reveals no information about
the secret inputs and can be verified much faster than the original
computation. Proof systems can be characterized by several important criteria: The prover time, the verifier time, the proof size, and
the cryptographic assumptions required for the proof to be secure.
Each application of proof systems results in a different set of requirements on these criteria. For instance, private transactions [6]
require a proof per transaction to be posted on a blockchain and
distributed to all blockchain nodes, thus prioritizing proof size.

Recent years have seen an explosion in proof systems [10, 18,
21, 61]. Each of them achieves a different Pareto optimal point
with respect to the criteria. In all applications, prover time is important, and fast provers enable new applications. Recently, two
proof systems have been accelerated in hardware: Groth16 [21] in
pipeZK [64] and SZKP [12], and Orion with NoCap [49].
Groth16 produces very short proofs (188 bytes) and enables
millisecond verification, independent of computation size. However,
it relies on a strong cryptographic assumption; a circuit-specific
trusted setup where a trusted party generates keys using secret
randomness. If this randomness is not properly discarded or the
party is malicious, the system’s security is compromised, allowing
false statements to be proven. Hence, Zcash and other applications
have moved away from circuit-specific trusted-setup protocols [42].
On the other hand, Orion does not require a trusted setup, has a fast
prover, and does not rely on elliptic curve cryptography, but has
very large (8MB) proofs. This is 4× larger than the maximum block
size of about 2MB in Ethereum cryptocurrency. Thus, a private
transaction with an Orion proof would not fit into a single block.
In this work, we accelerate HyperPlonk [10], a recent ZKP system gaining attention for its intriguing set of tradeoffs, making
it suitable for many applications. Its proofs are about 5 KB and
it uses a so-called universal trusted setup [22]. This is run only
once and reused for any computation. It is easy to run the setup
among many parties. The security is guaranteed as long as at least
one party is honest. Unlike Groth16 and others, it does not use
the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT), instead using SumCheck.
NTTs asymptotically run in time 𝑂 (𝑛 log(𝑛)) (𝑛 represents the size
of underlying computation), while SumCheck runs in linear time.
Accelerating HyperPlonk presents its own challenges. First, as
noted, the protocol replaces NTT, well studied in the hardware
literature, with the SumCheck protocol, which is relatively less
understood from a hardware standpoint. Although implemented in
NoCap [49], as we will shortly discuss, HyperPlonk’s SumChecks
are significantly more complex, incurring greater bandwidth costs
and design complexity. Further, HyperPlonk introduces additional
runtime computations like modular inverses that are not needed in

Alhad Daftardar, Jianqiao Mo, Joey Ah-kiow, Benedikt Bünz, Ramesh Karri, Siddharth Garg, and Brandon Reagen

Groth16 and Orion, and thus not studied from a hardware standpoint in this prior body of work. The additional design complexity
requires careful architectural design, new hardware optimizations,
and thorough design space exploration to identify architectures
with area-performance tradeoffs that justify hardware acceleration.
In this paper we present zkSpeed, a modular HyperPlonk accelerator that overcomes the above challenges. zkSpeed comprises eight
unique accelerator units that are composed into a complete architecture, including shared and local scratchpads to capture on-chip data
reuse. Units and SRAMs communicate via a multi-channel shared
bus, and we develop a mapping of complete Hyperplonk protocol
onto zkSpeed. This paper makes the following contributions:
• A high-throughput, fully-pipelined accelerator to handle
three flavors of SumCheck for HyperPlonk-based proofs
• A novel implementation for modular inversion to compute
fraction polynomials not seen in other ZKP protocols
• Additional optimizations across all hardware units that save
upwards of 50% area per unit and up to 85% in bandwidth.
• A comprehensive design space exploration of all hardware
units to investigate design tradeoffs as we scale to highperformance designs and advanced memory technologies.
• A full-chip design that achieves 801× gmean speedup over
CPU at iso-compute area

State-of-the-art ZKP protocols are zero-knowledge Succinct Noninteractive Argument of Knowledge (zkSNARKs). zkSNARKs have
three properties: (i) zero-knowledge, i.e., the proof does not reveal
any information about the secret witness 𝑤; (ii) succinct, i.e., the
proof has a few hundreds of bytes; and (iii) non-interactive, i.e., P
sends the proof to V in one exchange.
zkSNARKs like HyperPlonk use polynomials to encode the correct execution of the target program. Polynomials can encode complex computations and constraints in a compact form, reducing
the computational burden on the V to a few checks, instead of
requiring inspection of individual operations in the program. In
HyperPlonk, the two most time consuming kernels are SumCheck
and Multiscalar Multiplications (MSM). The SumCheck kernel lets
the P demonstrate knowledge of a polynomial by verifying that
its properties hold over a large set of inputs without revealing
the polynomial. MSMs ensure that P is bound to that polynomial,
preventing manipulation of the polynomial in the proof.

The SumCheck Kernel

SumCheck is an interactive protocol between a prover P and a
verifier V. P demonstrates to V, that it has correctly computed
the sum of a polynomial over the boolean hypercube, i.e., over all
Boolean (0/1) assignments of its variables [57].
Given a multivariate polynomial 𝑃 (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, . . . , 𝑥 𝜇 ), where 𝑥𝑖 ∈
F𝑞 1 , P wants to prove to V that it correctly computed the sum
𝐻=

∑︁

𝑥 2 ∈ {0,1} 𝑥 3 ∈ {0,1}

𝑥 𝜇 ∈ {0,1}

and returns it to V in the form of its coefficients. V checks that
𝑔1 (0) + 𝑔1 (1) = 𝐻 , and if so, generates a random challenge 𝑟 1 ∈ F𝑞
and sends it to P. V asks P to prove that
∑︁
∑︁
∑︁
𝑔1 (𝑟 1 ) =
···
𝑃 (𝑟 1, 𝑥 2, . . . , 𝑥 𝜇 ),
𝑥 2 ∈ {0,1} 𝑥 3 ∈ {0,1}

𝑥 𝜇 ∈ {0,1}

which is an instance of SumCheck, except over a (𝜇 − 1)-variate
polynomial. Thus, in Round 2, P computes and returns
∑︁
∑︁
∑︁
𝑔2 (𝑥 2 ) =
···
𝑃 (𝑟 1, 𝑥 2, . . . , 𝑥 𝜇 )
𝑥 3 ∈ {0,1} 𝑥 4 ∈ {0,1}

𝑥 𝜇 ∈ {0,1}

to V and the protocol repeats recursively for a total of 𝜇 rounds. If
all checks pass, V accepts P’s claim about 𝐻 .

2.3

Multilinear Polynomials

ZKPs like HyperPlonk use multilinear polynomials, that are linear
in each of their variables. For example,
𝑓 (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, 𝑥 3 ) = 𝑥 1𝑥 2 + 2𝑥 1𝑥 3 + 3𝑥 1𝑥 2𝑥 3

2 Background
2.1 zkSNARKs

2.2

P and V engage in a multi-round protocol. In Round 1, P computes 𝑔1 (𝑥 1 ), a univariate polynomial of 𝑥 1 by summing over all
binary values of the remaining variables:
∑︁
∑︁
∑︁
𝑔1 (𝑥 1 ) =
···
𝑃 (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, . . . , 𝑥 𝜇 )

∑︁

𝑥 1 ∈ {0,1} 𝑥 2 ∈ {0,1}

···

∑︁

𝑃 (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, . . . , 𝑥 𝜇 ).

𝑥 𝜇 ∈ {0,1}

1 each variable can be an integer modulo a prime number 𝑞 .

is multilinear because the maximum degree of individual variables
is one. ZKP protocols use a general representations of multilinear
polynomials, shown below for a 2-variable multilinear polynomial:
𝑓 (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2 ) = (1 −𝑥 2 )(1 −𝑥 1 )𝑎 0 +𝑥 2 (1 −𝑥 1 )𝑎 1 + (1 −𝑥 2 )𝑥 1𝑎 2 +𝑥 2𝑥 1𝑎 3 .
These representations map cleanly to hardware, since we can
store polynomials as lookup tables indexed by the binary values
of (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2 ). In general, a multilinear polynomial with 𝜇 variables
𝑥 1 . . . 𝑥 𝜇 can be stored in a lookup table of 2𝜇 entries. As we will
discuss in Section 3, HyperPlonk uses multilinear polynomials as
building blocks for higher-degree polynomials on which we then
perform SumCheck and other computations. In the rest of the paper, we will use the term MLE table to refer to these lookup data
structures (MLE stands for "multilinear extensions" [57]; the word
“extension" reflects the fact that these polynomials can also be evaluated at non-binary, or extended, values).

2.4

The MSM Kernel

MSMs are dot products between a vector of scalars 𝑠® and a vector
Í
of 2D or 3D points 𝑃® on an elliptical curve, e.g. 𝑛−1
𝑖=0 𝑠𝑖 𝑃𝑖 . MSMs
are used in ZKPs to perform commitments. A commitment is a
cryptographic primitive that binds a prover to a value without
revealing it. In zkSNARK protocols like HyperPlonk [10], the scalars
are the entries of the MLE tables. Computing a dot-product reduces
these polynomials to a single value, i.e., the commitment.
MSMs are a bottleneck in ZKP provers and recent work has
focused on accelerating them on ASIC and GPU [12, 25, 31, 35, 36, 64,
66]. The bottleneck is due to the extremely expensive elliptic curve
point multiplications that they use. To reduce this cost, MSMs use
Pippenger’s algorithm [44], which performs point multiplications
via several point additions (PADDs). PADDs are still expensive,
typically tens of regular multiplications. In the context of ASIC

