Debunking the CUDA Myth Towards GPU-based AI Systems
: Evaluation of the Performance and Programmability of Intel’s Gaudi NPU for AI Model Serving
Yunjae Lee†§ Juntaek Lim†§
Jehyeon Bang† Eunyeong Cho† Huijong Jeong‡ Taesu Kim‡ Hyungjun Kim‡
Joonhyung Lee∗ Jinseop Im† Ranggi Hwang† Se Jung Kwon∗ Dongsoo Lee∗
Minsoo Rhu†⋄
†KAIST ∗NAVER Cloud ‡SqueezeBits
Abstract
This paper presents a comprehensive evaluation of Intel Gaudi
NPUs as an alternative to NVIDIA GPUs, which is currently the
de facto standard in AI system design. First, we create a suite of
microbenchmarks to compare Intel Gaudi-2 with NVIDIA A100,
showing that Gaudi-2 achieves competitive performance not only
in primitive AI compute, memory, and communication operations
but also in executing several important AI workloads end-to-end.
We then assess Gaudi NPU’s programmability by discussing several
software-level optimization strategies to employ for implementing
critical FBGEMM operators and vLLM, evaluating their efficiency
against GPU-optimized counterparts. Results indicate that Gaudi-
2 achieves energy efficiency comparable to A100, though there
are notable areas for improvement in terms of software maturity.
Overall, we conclude that, with effective integration into high-
level AI frameworks, Gaudi NPUs could challenge NVIDIA GPU’s
dominance in the AI server market, though further improvements
are necessary to fully compete with NVIDIA’s robust software
ecosystem.
1 Introduction
“In the past few years there have been many stud-
ies claiming GPUs deliver substantial speedups
(10×−1,000×) over multi-core CPUs on through-
put computing kernels. . . . After applying opti-
mizations appropriate for both CPUs and GPUs
the performance gap between NVIDIA GTX280
and Intel Core i7 960 narrows to only 2.5×”
“Debunking the 100X GPU vs. CPU Myth:
An Evaluation of Throughput Computing on
CPU and GPU”, Intel, ISCA, 2010 [45]
Intel’s latency-optimized processor architectures have domi-
nated the computing industry for decades, serving as the foun-
dation for executing a wide range of applications. However, as GPU
computing gained prominence in the late 2000s, NVIDIA, then the
underdog, began to challenge Intel’s long-standing dominance in
the server market. With the rise of AI, throughput-optimized pro-
cessor architectures spearheaded by NVIDIA GPUs dethroned Intel,
establishing NVIDIA’s CUDA software ecosystem as the de facto
standard for training and deploying AI models.
§Co-first authors who contributed equally to this research.
⋄Corresponding author: Minsoo Rhu (mrhu@kaist.ac.kr)
One might argue that domain-specific architectures for AI, also
known as Neural Processing Units (NPUs), present competitive
alternatives to GPUs. However, cases of successfully utilizing NPUs
for deploying AI services are limited to a handful of hyperscalers
that can amortize the enormous development costs of NPUs by serv-
ing millions to billions of customers with their AI offerings (e.g.,
Google’s TPU [37], Meta’s MTIA [15], Amazon’s Inferentia [2]). As
a result, most AI services deployed today are built using NVIDIA
GPUs. The primary advantage of NVIDIA GPUs over commercially
available NPUs is their ease of programming with CUDA. The
flexible programming interface of CUDA, along with the rich soft-
ware ecosystem built around GPU-accelerated backend libraries
(e.g., cuBLAS, cuDNN, cuSPARSE, cuSOLVER, cuDF, cuVS [55–
58, 68, 69]), allows developers to easily implement and optimize
new AI models created by AI practitioners (e.g., state-space models
like Mamba [1]). While some cloud service providers like Google
and Amazon do offer NPUs for developers in the form of “AI-as-
a-Service” [3, 20], these platforms provide only limited access and
programmability for the backend NPUs, such as Google TPU [19]
and Amazon Inferentia [2]. This limitation makes it challenging to
perform low-level kernel implementation and performance opti-
mization specific to the target backend NPU architecture.
Given this landscape, Intel’s Gaudi NPU [24] is noteworthy for
several reasons. First, Gaudi NPUs come with a native programming
language called TPC-C (the CUDA equivalent for Gaudi) [33] as well
as low-level compute primitives that ease the implementation of
compute kernels targeting the NPU’s compute engines. Second, the
performance of end-to-end AI applications utilizing these compute
kernels is (according to Intel’s claims) comparable to, and in some
cases better than, that of NVIDIA GPUs. Third, Gaudi NPUs are
currently widely available for purchase, allowing researchers to
thoroughly characterize this new NPU device vs. NVIDIA GPUs.
To this end, this paper presents a detailed characterization of In-
tel’s Gaudi NPU for AI model serving, assessing whether Intel, now
the underdog, can pose a tangible threat to NVIDIA’s seemingly
unassailable dominance in the AI computing market. A thorough
understanding of this emerging NPU architecture and its applicabil-
ity to various AI workloads can offer valuable insights for program-
mers, AI service providers, and computer architects working on
next-generation NPU designs. As such, we conduct a comprehen-
sive analysis of the Gaudi NPU from multiple dimensions, evaluat-
ing not just its raw performance but also its programmability for
facilitating performance optimization and AI model development.
1
arXiv:2501.00210v2
[cs.DC]
22
Mar
2025
Table 1: Comparison of NVIDIA A100 and Intel Gaudi-2.
NVIDIA A100 Intel Gaudi-2 Ratio
Compute TFLOPS (BF16)
312 (Tensor Cores) 432 (MME) 1.4×
39 (SIMD Cores) 11 (TPC) 0.3×
Memory
HBM Type HBM2E -
HBM Capacity 80 GB 96 GB 1.2×
HBM bandwidth 2 TB/sec 2.46 TB/sec 1.2×
SRAM capacity 40 MB (L2 Cache) 48 MB (Shared) 1.2×
Communication
600 GB/sec bidirectional
(NVLink)
600 GB/sec bidirectional
(RoCE)
1.0×
Power 400 Watts 600 Watts 1.5×
(Performance) To enable detailed experimental studies and anal-
yses, we first develop a set of microbenchmarks targeting Gaudi
NPUs to stress-test their ability to maximize performance in sev-
eral key compute, memory, and communication primitives. In this
work, we use Intel’s second-generation Gaudi NPU (Gaudi-2) and
NVIDIA’s A100 GPU as comparison points1, as both processors
are manufactured using TSMC’s 7nm technology node and are
supported by an HBM2E-based memory subsystem, providing com-
parable performance (Table 1). Our microbenchmarking revealed
that Gaudi-2 demonstrates highly competitive performance in im-
portant primitive AI operations, particularly for tasks involving
regular compute and memory accesses. However, Gaudi-2 did fall
short of A100 in certain scenarios involving fine-grained data ac-
cesses and collective communications across a small number of
processors.
After confirming Gaudi NPU’s competitiveness against NVIDIA
GPUs in primitive AI operations through our microbenchmark-
based analysis, we next evaluate both systems at the end-to-end
AI application level. Specifically, we focus on recommendation sys-
tems (RecSys) and large language models (LLMs), as these two are
among the most widely deployed AI models in cloud environments.
Our analysis of end-to-end AI applications revealed that Gaudi-2
achieves 28% lower energy-efficiency for RecSys but 50% higher
energy-efficiency for LLMs compared to the A100.
(Programmability) We also present case studies on utilizing the
Gaudi NPU’s programming interface to optimize its performance.
Specifically, we discuss software-level optimizations that can be
employed to develop Gaudi NPU-optimized versions of FBGEMM’s
Batched Embedding Table [66] and vLLM [42], which enable high-
performance model serving for RecSys and LLMs, respectively. Ini-
tially, publicly available Gaudi-optimized software for RecSys em-
bedding layers and vLLM showed underwhelming results, achieving
only 37% and 6% of the performance seen in their GPU-optimized
counterparts. However, through various software-level optimiza-
tions applied at the low-level TPC-C (Batched Embedding Table)
and high-level PyTorch (vLLM), we show that the performance-
optimized Gaudi-2 can achieve 80% and 101% of A100’s performance
running end-to-end RecSys and LLM applications based on the
state-of-the-art FBGEMM (RecSys) and vLLM (LLM).
Overall, we conclude that the Gaudi NPU has significant po-
tential to emerge as a contender to NVIDIA GPUs for AI model
serving, challenging NVIDIA’s dominance in the AI computing
industry. Most AI practitioners use high-level AI frameworks like
PyTorch or TensorFlow for model development. As long as NPU
1The hardware and software architecture of Intel’s recently announced Gaudi-3 is
virtually identical to that of Gaudi-2 (but with limited availability), except that Gaudi-3
offers higher compute and memory throughput, thanks to its chiplet-based design.
TPC
SRAM
(Shared mem.)
MME
HBM
DMA
Global memory
Programmable
Configurable
Scratchpad
(Local mem.)
Scalar
processing
unit
Vector
processing
unit
Load/Store unit
TPC
MME
i) square-shaped
GEMM
ii) irregularly-shaped
GEMM
M
K
K
N
M/2
K
K
2N
Figure 1: High-level overview of Intel’s Gaudi NPU architecture.
chip vendors effectively support these frameworks with optimized
low-level backend libraries, our analysis suggests that NVIDIA’s
CUDA programming system might not be as formidable a “moat”
in the AI server market. In other words, our conclusion is that the
strength of NVIDIA GPU-based AI systems lies in its rich software
ecosystem, rather than in CUDA itself. However, it is important not
to misconstrue our assessment as an overly optimistic outlook on
Intel’s Gaudi NPUs. NVIDIA’s stronghold in AI still remains robust,
and we believe that Gaudi NPUs still face several key challenges
that should be addressed to effectively compete with NVIDIA’s
established position, which we further discuss in Section 5.
To summarize our key contributions:
• To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to provide
a detailed characterization of Intel’s Gaudi NPUs compared
to NVIDIA GPUs, examining not only their performance
but, more crucially, their programmability.
• We implement a set of microbenchmarks to conduct a com-
parative study with NVIDIA GPUs, analyzing the potential,
limitations, and bottlenecks of the Gaudi NPU architecture.
• To assess Gaudi NPU’s programmability, we discuss im-
portant software-level optimization strategies to employ
to develop Gaudi-optimized versions of DLRM [53] and
vLLM [42]. Through this exercise, we discuss the strengths
and weaknesses of the Gaudi NPU’s software architecture.
2 Background
2.1 Intel Gaudi Hardware Architecture
(Compute) The Gaudi processor architecture is designed based
on a heterogeneous compute paradigm, integrating two key compo-
nents (Figure 1): Matrix Multiplication Engines (MMEs) and fully
programmable Tensor Processing Cores (TPCs). Gaudi-2 features
two MMEs and 24 TPCs, which together provide high throughput
by pipelining computations between the MMEs and TPCs.
The MME is a large, output-stationary systolic array with a
256×256 MAC (Multiply-Accumulate) structure [40], designed to
handle general matrix multiplication (GEMM) workloads, such as
fully connected, convolutional, and batched GEMM layers. The
MME is designed to be highly configurable in order to maximize the
utilization of its MAC array. Specifically, the two MMEs in Gaudi-2,
originally composed of two separate 256×256 MAC units, can be
dynamically reconfigured at runtime as a single 512×256 MAC unit,
a single 1024×128 MAC unit, and others, depending on the shape of
the input and output matrices of the GEMM operation. The optimal
MME configuration for each target GEMM is determined by the
Gaudi graph compiler, which we discuss in Section 3.2. Similar to
2
