SpecEE: Accelerating Large Language Model Inference with
Speculative Early Exiting
Jiaming Xu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
jiamingxu@sjtu.edu.cn
Jiayi Pan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
pan_jiayi@sjtu.edu.cn
Yongkang Zhou
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
zeenny.willians@sjtu.edu.cn
Siming Chen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
320220941351@lzu.edu.cn
Jinhao Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
kimholee@sjtu.edu.cn
Yaoxiu Lian
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
lianyaoxiu@sjtu.edu.cn
Junyi Wu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
kimi_wu@sjtu.edu.cn
Guohao Dai∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University;
Infinigence-AI; SII
Shanghai, China
daiguohao@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Early exiting has recently emerged as a promising technique for
accelerating large language models (LLMs) by effectively reduc-
ing the hardware computation and memory access. In this paper,
we identify that the LLM vocabulary serves as the runtime search
space of the early exiting predictor and significantly influences
the predictor workload (e.g., ∼ 20% overall inference latency with
∼ 3 × 104 vocabulary size in Llama2). We propose a novel para-
digm using speculative models to reduce this search space, while
addressing three critical challenges for further predictor optimiza-
tion. (1) Time-consuming predictor with high computational
complexity. Current predictor designs leverage basic models with
high-dimensional input that ignore inherent data variation and
GPU parallelization opportunities, resulting in ∼ 15% overall in-
ference latency. (2) Under-utilization of layer-wise predictor
deployment. Current early exiting systems treat the predictor in
each layer equally without considering the activation frequencies
of layer-wise predictors, leading to ∼ 20% inference overhead. (3)
Exponential mapping complexity of predictor in speculative
decoding. Each token in the token tree of speculative decoding is
treated as an independent search space when applying the current
early exiting mapping, leading to exponential mapping complexity
and failing to incorporate the high-throughput benefits
∗Corresponding Author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3730996
To address the above challenges, we present SpecEE, a fast LLM
inference engine with speculative early exiting. (1) At the algo-
rithm level, we propose the speculation-based lightweight pre-
dictor design by exploiting the probabilistic correlation between
the speculative tokens and the correct results and high parallelism
of GPUs. (2) At the system level, we point out that not all layers
need a predictor and design the two-level heuristic predictor
scheduling engine based on skewed distribution and contextual
similarity. (3) At the mapping level, we point out that different
decoding methods share the same essential characteristics, and pro-
pose the context-aware merged mapping for predictor with
efficient GPU implementations to support speculative decoding,
and form a framework for various existing orthogonal accelera-
tion techniques (e.g., quantization and sparse activation) on cloud
and personal computer (PC) scenarios, successfully pushing the
Pareto frontier of accuracy and speedup. It is worth noting that
SpecEE can be applied to any LLM by negligible training overhead
in advance without affecting the model’s original parameters. Ex-
tensive experiments show that SpecEE achieves 2.25× and 2.43×
speedup with Llama2-7B on cloud and PC scenarios respectively.
The code is open-sourced in https://github.com/infinigence/SpecEE
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies → Machine learning approaches;
• Computer systems organization → Real-time systems.
Keywords
Large Language Model, Machine Learning and System, GPU
ACM Reference Format:
Jiaming Xu, Jiayi Pan, Yongkang Zhou, Siming Chen, Jinhao Li, Yaoxiu Lian,
Junyi Wu, and Guohao Dai. 2025. SpecEE: Accelerating Large Language
Model Inference with Speculative Early Exiting. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June
21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3695053.3730996
467
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Jiaming Xu et al.
0.9
0.95
1
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Normalized
Accuracy
Normalized Speedup
Fast Decoding
0%
50%
100%
7B 13B 70B 7B 13B 70B
Decoder Layer Others
Speculative
Decoding
Auto
regressive
Decoding
(a)
(b)
Quantization
Pruning
Baseline
HuggingFace
AWQ
SparseGPT
EAGLE
SpecEE
+AWQ
vllm
FlashAttention SpecEE+
EAGLE/vllm
Pushing by
SpecEE
?
am
I
…
layer id
doing
(c)
Dynamic
exiting
Calculated
layers
layer for early exit
How are you?
Llama2
I am doing well, thanks!
How about you?
Figure 1: (a) Pareto frontier of accuracy and speedup towards
LLM inference and deployment. The detailed normalized
accuracy and speedup are obtained with Llama2-7B on an
NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. (b) The ratio of the time of the de-
coder layer to end-to-end inference time in the original LLM.
The data of two decodings is obtained based on Hugging
Face [42] and EAGLE [27] frameworks. (c) Different numbers
of decoder layers are needed for different token generation.
1 Introduction
Towards the advancement of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI),
generative large language models (LLMs) have been successfully
applied across various domains, significantly enabling the rapid
development of numerous downstream tasks (e.g., agent applica-
tion [43], code generation [21] and robotics [8]). Driven by the
scaling law, more and more LLMs with an increasing number of
parameters (e.g., Grok-1 [44] with 314B parameters) have proven
remarkable performance in many scenarios. However, this further
results in significant memory requirements and inference latency,
which poses great challenges for the deployment of practical appli-
cations. For cloud service vendors of LLMs, the extended response
time translates to increased infrastructure costs (e.g., energy) and
suboptimal user experiences. For example, it is estimated that Ope-
nAI consumes 260.42 MWh of energy per day [48], which translates
into a cost of $26,042 per day, based on U.S. industrial electricity
prices of about 10 cents per kWh. This is approximately five times
the average monthly income of $4,831 in the United States [3].
Consequently, many previous works have explored techniques to
accelerate LLM inference and reduce infrastructure cost for deploy-
ment, encompassing algorithm optimization, system enhancements,
and hardware advancements [26, 47]. Some of these works (e.g., fast
decoding [1, 7, 18, 23, 27]) ensure the consistency of results, while
others (e.g., pruning and quantization [10, 25, 28]) may lead to ac-
curacy loss, thus forming a Pareto frontier of accuracy and speedup
towards LLM inference and deployment as shown in Figure 1(a).
However, due to the lack of consideration of the relationship be-
tween the dynamic input and the static model in these works, the
multiple cascaded layers in the original model account for 70 ∼ 95%
of end-to-end inference shown in Figure 1(b), becoming the primary
bottleneck for pushing the Pareto frontier forward.
The inference of LLM is to generate the token with the highest
probability from the full vocabulary through cascading decoder
layers, which is essentially an online search problem and the search
space is the full vocabulary. Early exiting algorithm is an emerg-
ing optimization in dynamic neural networks [15, 24] that aims
to timely and efficiently predict when search termination occurs.
Several recent works [9, 19] have highlighted that not all decoder
layers are necessary during inference in LLMs, enabling dynamic
adjustments for different tokens. They suggest that the LLM pa-
rameters should be adjusted based on the complexity of the task
during inference. As shown in Figure 1(c), during token generation,
different tokens require different forward layers to be generated.
Commonly, these works entail integrating data-driven predictors
(e.g., Support Vector Machine (SVM) [16] and Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) [36]) after each layer and structuring relevant features as
input information to predict exiting.
In this paper, we point out that the LLM vocabulary also
serves as the online search space (the linear operation with the
ℎ𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛_𝑑𝑖𝑚 × 𝑣𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑦_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 weight, called LM Head, in LLM) of
the early exiting predictors and significantly influences the work-
load (e.g., ∼ 20% inference overhead with ∼ 3 × 104 vocabulary size
of Llama2 [41] in AdaInfer [9]). Therefore, we propose a novel par-
adigm using speculative models to reduce this search space
by generating speculative tokens, successfully achieving 104×
search space reduction for predictors shown in Figure 2(b). To
apply the insight for further predictor optimization, the following
challenges remain unsolved.
Challenge-1: Time-consuming predictor with high design
complexity. Current LLM early exiting predictor [9, 19] commonly
need to traverse the full search space (multiplied with the complete
LM Head) to get the relevant data before prediction, and then take
the raw high-dimensional (> 4 × 103) data as input for prediction
without feature analysis and extraction. To accommodate high-
dimensional input data, the predictor adopts a basic model (e.g.,
SVM in AdaInfer [9]) with high computational complexity without
considering the parallelism of GPUs, resulting in ∼ 30% overall
computation and ∼ 15% overall inference latency.
Challenge-2: Under-utilization of layer-wise predictor de-
ployment. Current early exiting system equally treat the decoder
layers of LLMs and deploy the predictor after each layer. Statis-
tical data indicates that the success probability of the predictors
follows a skewed distribution, meaning that early exiting typically
occurs at a fixed set of layers for different tokens. This implies that
the computations of most other predictors are ineffective in the
majority of cases, resulting in ∼ 20% additional inference overhead.
Challenge-3: Exponential mapping complexity of predic-
tor in speculative decoding. Speculative decoding [2, 4, 27] pro-
poses the pattern of draft generation and token verification through
tree-based token structure to address the poor throughput of au-
toregressive decoding. However, when applying the current early
exiting mapping which aims to associate the tokens with the search
space of predictors, each token of the token tree is treated as an
468
