Constant-Rate Entanglement Distillation for Fast Quantum
Interconnects
Christopher Pattison∗

Gefen Baranes∗

Juan Pablo Bonilla Ataides

California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, California, USA
QuEra Computing
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
cpattiso@caltech.edu

Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
MIT
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
gbaranes@mit.edu

Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
jbonillaataides@g.harvard.edu

Mikhail D. Lukin

Hengyun Zhou

Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
lukin@physics.harvard.edu

QuEra Computing
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
hyharryzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Distributed quantum computing allows the modular construction
of large-scale quantum computers and enables new protocols for
blind quantum computation. However, such applications in the
large-scale, fault-tolerant regime place stringent demands on the
fidelity and rate of entanglement generation, which are not met by
existing methods for quantum interconnects.
In this work, we develop constant-rate entanglement distillation
methods to address this bottleneck in the setting of noisy local operations. By using a sequence of two-way entanglement distillation
protocols based on quantum error detecting codes with increasing
rate, and combining with standard fault tolerance techniques, we
achieve constant-rate entanglement distillation. We show that the
scheme has constant-rate in expectation, and further numerically
optimize to achieve low practical overhead under memory constraints. We find that compared to existing quantum interconnect

schemes, our methods reduce the communication overhead by more
than 10× in relevant regimes, leading to a direct speed-up in the
execution of distributed quantum algorithms.

CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Quantum computing.

Keywords
Quantum Computing, Quantum Error Correction, Quantum Networking, Distributed Quantum Computing
ACM Reference Format:
Christopher Pattison, Gefen Baranes, Juan Pablo Bonilla Ataides, Mikhail
D. Lukin, and Hengyun Zhou. 2025. Constant-Rate Entanglement Distillation for Fast Quantum Interconnects. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June
21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731069

∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.

We acknowledge helpful discussions with M. Beverland, D. Bluvstein, B. Gu, L. Jiang,
B. Li, J. Ramette, J. Sinclair, J. Slote, S. Wang, V. Vuletic, Q. Xu. We acknowledge financial
support from IARPA and the Army Research Office, under the Entangled Logical
Qubits program (Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-23-2-0219), the DARPA
IMPAQT program (grant number HR0011-23-3-0012), DARPA MeasQuIT program
(grant number HR0011-24-9-0359), U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science (grant
number DE-SC0020290), the National Science Foundation (grant number PHY-2012023),
the QuSEC (grant number OMA-2326787), the CQN (grant number EEC-1941583), and
the DOE/LBNL QSA (grant number DE-AC02-05CH11231). G.B. acknowledges support
from the MIT Patrons of Physics Fellows Society. J.P.B.A. acknowledges support from
the Generation Q G2 fellowship and the Ramsay Centre for Western Civilisation. C.A.P.
thanks QuEra Computing and Harvard University for hospitality, during which the
majority of this work was completed. The Institute for Quantum Information and
Matter (IQIM) and the Center for Ultracold Atoms (CUA) are NSF Physics Frontiers
Centers.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731069

257

1

Introduction

The ability to interconnect multiple quantum nodes is key to a
wide range of tasks in quantum communication, distributed quantum metrology, and distributed quantum computing [5, 36, 69].
By exploiting entanglement between multiple network nodes, one
can perform information-theoretic-secure quantum key distribution [7, 19, 27, 41], or realize optical interferometry with very long
baselines [28, 34, 35]. Furthermore, a fast and high-fidelity quantum interconnect can enable multi-node quantum supercomputing [13, 50], as well as blind quantum computation, where
an untrusted server can perform a desired computation without
gaining knowledge about the computation itself [12, 20]. The ability
to distribute the computation among multiple nodes also enables
heterogeneous quantum compute nodes [66] and permits modularity and interchangeability of hardware systems.
Despite these promising applications, the capabilities of current
generation quantum interconnects are still very far from the desired
fidelities and communication rates. This is particularly challenging
for applications involving computation, where one has stringent
demands on both the achievable entanglement fidelity as well as

ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

Christopher Pattison, Gefen Baranes, Juan Pablo Bonilla Ataides, Mikhail D. Lukin, and Hengyun Zhou

Alice
Compute

Bob
Network

Network

Compute

noisy link

noisy gates

noisy gates

Figure 1: Overview of the distributed quantum computing model with two nodes, Alice and Bob. Each node consists of a
“Compute” area for local quantum operations and a “Network” area, a buffer memory space for managing entangled qubits.
Logical qubits in the network are entangled over a noisy channel, then distilled and transferred to the compute areas to facilitate
distributed quantum computations. With switch networks, the results can be readily generalized to multiple networked nodes.
the resulting rate of quantum communication. For example, stateof-the-art demonstrations of interconnecting quantum nodes only
achieve entangling fidelities in the high 90s and entangling rates
of a few hundred pairs per second [32, 33, 37, 47, 49, 55, 59, 67].
The entanglement fidelity can be improved through the use of various one-way or two-way entanglement distillation schemes [8, 9],
but this often leads to a further degradation in the effective logical entangling rate. With typical target gate operation infidelities
for large-scale algorithms in the 10 −12 range, the standard 4-to1 recursive distillation scheme would require almost a hundred
physical Bell pairs (per logical Bell pair) of percent-level infidelity.
Alternative schemes relying on lattice surgery have also been developed [23, 58], but would again require hundreds to thousands of
physical Bell pairs per logical Bell pair in similar parameter regimes.
Since a single teleported CNOT requires a single logical Bell pair,
these factors suggests that current schemes and physical hardware
will result in logical entangling rates of a few Hz, much slower than
the QEC clock rates of 1 kHz to 1 MHz in various state-of-the-art
hardware systems [1, 2, 11, 18, 31, 38, 52, 56, 60, 65]. It is thus highly
desirable to develop methods that use the communication link much
more sparingly, thereby achieving higher logical entangling rates
while maintaining high target logical fidelities.
In this paper, we develop entanglement distillation methods that
achieve constant quantum communication overhead in expectation, where the communication overhead is defined as the
number of noisy physical Bell pairs required per high quality logical
Bell pair. We further show that they yield practical protocols with
an order of magnitude lower communication overhead than
existing schemes. To achieve this, we adapt a technique originating
in fault-tolerant computation [71], where careful selection of the
code concatenation sequence permits a concatenated code family
to achieve constant encoding rate. We rigorously analyze the error
rates and success probabilities at each step of the protocol, providing theoretical guarantees of the communication overhead and
performance. We then examine our scheme numerically, directly
optimizing the code sequence over the best possible parameters for

258

small classical and quantum codes [29], identifying ones with over
an order of magnitude lower overhead than existing schemes.
Our work makes the following key contributions:
• Constant-rate entanglement distillation: We develop entanglement distillation schemes that achieve constant communication overhead, meaning that only a constant number of
physical Bell pairs per logical Bell pair are required, independent of the fidelity target.
• Order-of-magnitude reduction in practical distillation
overhead: We numerically optimize our distillation sequence,
identifying code sequences that have significantly lower communication overhead than existing methods. For example, at
network communication error rates of 5%, we identify sequences
with 13.5× lower overhead than existing approaches (Tab. 1).
• Comprehensive trade-off analysis: We perform an in-depth
analysis of the resource trade-offs available in our scheme, such
as the trade-off between the communication overhead and the
footprint of the network buffer memory (Fig. 1), identifying
code sequences suitable for a wide range of operating regimes.
Our techniques are particularly useful in the regime where each
network node is of a reasonably large size, such that there is sufficient buffer memory space to store the logical qubits used for distillation. Recent hardware advances have demonstrated the possibility
of local nodes with hundreds to thousands of physical qubits in a
variety of physical platforms [17, 42, 43, 53, 57, 68], suggesting that
this is a very relevant regime for distributed quantum computation.
This is in contrast to the setting of small, noisy local nodes typically
analyzed in the setting of quantum networks [27, 36, 51, 72]. We
therefore believe that our techniques will be useful for large scale,
fault-tolerant distributed quantum computing.

2 Background
2.1 The Task of Quantum Interconnects
Distributed quantum computing enables scalable, modular and robust construction of quantum computing systems. Quantum interconnects serve as the network interface between multiple quantum

