arXiv:2506.10258v1 [quant-ph] 12 Jun 2025

Synchronization for Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computers
Satvik Maurya

Swamit Tannu

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA

Abstract

1

Quantum Error Correction (QEC) codes store information reliably
in logical qubits by encoding them in a larger number of less reliable
qubits. The surface code, known for its high resilience to physical
errors, is a leading candidate for fault-tolerant quantum computing
(FTQC). Logical qubits encoded with the surface code can be in
different phases of their syndrome generation cycle, thereby introducing desynchronization in the system. This can occur due
to the production of non-Clifford states, dropouts due to fabrication defects, and the use of other QEC codes with the surface code
to reduce resource requirements. Logical operations require the
syndrome generation cycles of the logical qubits involved to be synchronized. This requires the leading qubit to pause or slow down
its cycle, allowing more errors to accumulate before the next cycle,
thereby increasing the risk of uncorrectable errors.
To synchronize the syndrome generation cycles of logical qubits,
we define three policies - Passive, Active, and Hybrid. The Passive
policy is the baseline, and the simplest, wherein the leading logical
qubits idle until they are synchronized with the remaining logical
qubits. On the other hand, the Active policy aims to slow the leading logical qubits down gradually, by inserting short idle periods
before multiple code cycles. This approach reduces the logical error rate (LER) by up to 2.4× compared to the Passive policy. The
Hybrid policy further reduces the LER by up to 3.4× by reducing
the synchronization slack and running a few additional rounds of
error correction. Furthermore, the reduction in the logical error
rate with the proposed synchronization policies enables a speedup
in decoding latency of up to 2.2× with a circuit-level noise model.

The use of Quantum Error Correction (QEC) [71] is the most promising step toward practical, Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing
(FTQC). By using error-correcting codes such as the surface code [32,
50] that encode the state of each logical qubit onto many physical
qubits, it is possible to reduce the error rates on quantum computers
to run algorithms such as quantum simulation [57], factoring [72],
and chemistry simulations [4]. Recent experimental demonstrations
have already shown the advantage of using such error-correcting
codes [1, 2, 8, 51, 68]. In addition to reducing device-level noise,
systems must be scaled to support the large number of qubits required by fault-tolerant quantum computers, with the 400+ qubit
system unveiled by IBM [43] and roadmaps leading to larger systems to support error-correcting codes [36, 42] in the near future.
QEC codes work by executing a fixed sequence of gates followed
by measurements, which constitute one syndrome generation cycle.
This process is repeated, and the measurements made are used to
detect errors that may have occurred in the system. In this paper, we
focus on the systems-level problem of logical qubit synchronization
for the surface code using Lattice Surgery. While our evaluations
are restricted to patch-based encodings using the surface code and
Lattice Surgery due to their well-understood and well-defined properties, the problem we are addressing will hold true for other QEC
codes such as color codes [30] and qLDPC codes [9].
Lattice Surgery has emerged as the most promising candidate
for facilitating universal error-corrected quantum computing using
the surface code [31, 38, 54, 56]. In the patch-based encoding used
by Lattice Surgery, all logical operations (CNOTs, non-Clifford
gates) can be decomposed into split and merge operations. These
operations introduce a strict synchronization requirement on all
logical patches (qubits) in the system – in order to merge two (or
more) logical patches, the syndrome generation cycle for all patches
involved must begin at the same time immediately after the merge
operation. If one patch is in the middle of its syndrome generation
cycle while the rest are at the beginning of their cycles, the patches
cannot be merged immediately.
What can cause desynchronization among logical patches? Desynchronization occurs when a patch is at a different stage in its syndrome generation cycle compared to others involved in a Lattice
Surgery operation. To clarify the role of synchronization in FTQC
systems, we introduce the concept of logical clocks, each patch
completes its syndrome generation cycle within a single logical
clock cycle. However, even with uniform physical gate and measurement latencies, the phase of logical clocks can vary between
patches, leading to desynchronization. This variation arises from
several sources, outlined below:
Heterogeneous FTQC systems: In a homogeneous system composed of only surface code patches, synchronization will be unnecessary (assuming a uniform, defect-free system). The production of non-Clifford 𝑇 states (magic states) will be performed in

CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Quantum computing.

Keywords
Synchronization, Surface Code, Lattice Surgery, Quantum Error
Correction, Fault Tolerance, Quantum Computing Systems
ACM Reference Format:
Satvik Maurya and Swamit Tannu. 2025. Synchronization for Fault-Tolerant
Quantum Computers. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.
3730991

Corresponding author: smaurya@wisc.edu.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/2025/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3730991
1

Introduction

Satvik Maurya and Swamit Tannu

P

Sync.

P'

Color code
(non-Clifford states)

(a)

qLDPC code
(memory)

P
P''

Slack

IBM Sherbrooke Backend

100

|0⟩L

Norm. T count

Surface code
(compute)

Logical Error Rate

ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

|1⟩L
10−1

10−2
0

Time

(b)

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Idling period (ns)

(c)

2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00

2.40x

Passive
Active
Synchronization policy

(d)

Figure 1: (a) A heterogeneous FTQC system can optimize space-time volume by combining different QEC codes: surface codes
excel in computation, qLDPC codes serve well as memory with high coding rates and color codes efficiently produce low-cost
non-Clifford (magic) states. (b) Patches 𝑃, 𝑃 ′ are desynchronized if their syndrome generation cycles are in different phases at a
given point in time. Synchronizing them ensures both patches start their next syndrome generation cycle at the same time;
(c) Experimental evaluations on IBM Sherbrooke [44] for the logical error rate (LER) of the three-qubit repetition code as a
function of the idling period added before the second (and final) round of syndrome measurements (both |0⟩𝐿 = |000⟩, |1⟩𝐿 = |111⟩
logical observables). (d) The proposed Hybrid and Active synchronization policies reduce the LER compared to the Passive
policy, enabling deeper circuits.
distillation factories composed entirely of surface code patches.
However, the surface code suffers from a poor encoding rate, making the physical qubit requirements for practical applications extremely high. To combat this, recent works use qLDPC codes as
quantum memories [9, 80] and use color codes for magic state distillation [11, 17, 20, 35, 45, 63], which drastically reduce the physical
qubit requirements of FTQC systems. These codes can be used in
conjunction with the surface code for universal FTQC, as shown
in Figure 1(a). However, this introduces additional logical clock domains in the system – color codes and qLDPC codes have a logical
clock that is significantly different from the surface code due to
differences in the number of CNOTs and flag qubit measurements
in the syndrome generation circuits. These differences in the logical clocks will necessitate synchronization between logical qubits,
especially when operations span logical clock boundaries.
Dropouts, defects: Even in a homogeneous system of surface code
patches, synchronization may still be necessary due to fabrication
defects or failures in qubits and couplers [5, 24, 53, 58, 81, 93]. Such
dropouts and defects can be managed by modifying the syndrome
generation circuit, although this adjustment may result in some
logical patches experiencing extended clock cycles [24], thereby
introducing desynchronization across the system.
Other sources: Speculative execution of leakage reduction circuits [89], twist-based lattice surgery [15, 55], and uneven CNOT
latencies from chip-to-chip couplers in modular architectures [28,
59, 60, 66, 70, 76] can create variable-length surface code cycles,
can also lead to desynchronization in logical patches within a homogeneous system.
Our evaluations show that large-scale fault-tolerant quantum
computing (FTQC) systems can not operate in lockstep due to
the heterogeneity of codes and imperfect qubit lattice, resulting
in non-uniform syndrome generation cycles requiring forced synchronizations. We now ask: How can we reliably synchronize logical
patches? Figure 1(b) illustrates the need for synchronization between two logical patches, where the leading patch 𝑃 must either
slow down or pause error correction to allow the lagging patch 𝑃 ′
to catch up. However, the idling can compromise quantum error correction, causing uncorrectable errors. Recent experimental results
from Google reveal that idling errors are one of the primary causes

of logical failures [1], with data-qubit idling alone accounting for
over 20% of the total error budget.
To investigate the impact of idling errors on QEC, we implemented a three-qubit repetition code circuit on IBM’s Sherbrooke1
quantum computer [44], introducing idling delays before the final
syndrome measurement round. The impact of idling error is evident
in Figure 1(c): logical error rates increase dramatically with idling
durations, as idling significantly increases the likelihood of uncorrectable errors due to decoherence, thus sharply reducing logical
fidelity. In these trials, we used a look-up table (LUT)-based decoder
over 20,000 shots, implementing an “X-X" dynamical decoupling
sequence during all idle periods to mitigate decoherence.
To reduce the impact of idling errors incurred during synchronization, we introduce an Active synchronization policy that proactively distributes the synchronization slack among multiple syndrome generation rounds. The key insight behind this approach is
that smaller delays incur fewer decoherence errors in physical qubits,
and thus result in fewer logical errors. Compared to the baseline
Passive synchronization approach which idles the leading logical
patch for the entire synchronization slack right before the Lattice
Surgery operation, the Active synchronization policy achieves a
reduction of up to 2.4× in the logical error rate for two surface
code patches. This 2.4× reduction in the logical error rate can in
turn allow deeper logical circuits with more non-Clifford 𝑇 gates,
as shown in Figure 1(d). In cases where the syndrome generation
cycle times of the patches are unequal, synchronization can also
be achieved by running error correction for additional rounds. We
call this the Extra Rounds policy, and we augment it with Active
synchronization to create the Hybrid policy that reduces the LER
by up to 3.4×. Furthermore, we also show that by reducing the
logical error rate as compared to the Passive policy, the decoding
latency per Lattice Surgery operation can be reduced by up to 2.2×.
Our work is the first to focus on synchronization policies for
FTQC systems. We have developed a scalable and versatile simulator [69] to study the impact of non-uniform gate latencies and
synchronization overheads on the logical error rate and performance. The primary contributions of this work are as follows:
1We used qubits 33,37-40 with worst-case 𝑇 = 330.77𝜇𝑠 , 𝑇 = 72.68𝜇 s.
1
2

2

