RAGO: Systematic Performance Optimization
for Retrieval-Augmented Generation Serving
Wenqi Jiang‚
ETH Zurich
wenqi.jiang@inf.ethz.ch
Suvinay Subramanian
Google
suvinay@google.com
Cat Graves
Google DeepMind
cgraves@google.com
Gustavo Alonso
ETH Zurich
alonso@inf.ethz.ch
Amir Yazdanbakhshq
Google DeepMind
ayazdan@google.com
Vidushi Daduq
Google
vidushid@google.com
Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), which combines large
language models (LLMs) with retrievals from external knowledge
databases, is emerging as a popular approach for reliable LLM
serving. However, efficient RAG serving remains an open challenge
due to the rapid emergence of many RAG variants and the substantial
differences in workload characteristics across them. In this paper, we
make three fundamental contributions to advancing RAG serving.
First, we introduce RAGSchema, a structured abstraction that captures
the wide range of RAG algorithms, serving as a foundation for
performance optimization. Second, we analyze several representative
RAG workloads with distinct RAGSchema, revealing significant
performance variability across these workloads. Third, to address
this variability and meet diverse performance requirements, we
propose RAGO (Retrieval-Augmented Generation Optimizer), a
system optimization framework for efficient RAG serving. Our
evaluation shows that RAGO achieves up to a 2ˆ increase in QPS per
chip and a 55% reduction in time-to-first-token latency compared
to RAG systems built on LLM-system extensions.
1 Introduction
The rapid adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs) across
diverse applications — such as question answering [1–3], code
generation [4–6], and scientific discoveries [7–9] — showcases their
profound impact on automating knowledge-based tasks. Despite
these capabilities, LLM systems, when deployed in isolation (aka
LLM-only systems), face substantial challenges, such as data
staleness [10, 11], a propensity to hallucinate (generating factually
incorrect or nonsensical information), and limited, often rigid model
knowledge [11–13]. These challenges hinder the reliability and
adaptability of LLM-only systems, especially in applications that
demand high factual accuracy [14–17].
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as one
powerful solution to address the common pitfalls of LLM-only
systems for knowledge-intensive tasks [10, 18–21]. By retrieving
information from external databases and appending it to prompts
(Figure 1), RAG enhances the credibility, timeliness, and contextually
rich nature of LLM-generated responses. Leveraging the generative
prowess of LLMs alongside external knowledge sources, RAG not
‚
Work done while at Google
q Equal advising
What are Thomas Edison's
most notable inventions?
Generative LLM
Query
Thomas invented the
Internet, …
Knowledge database
These inventions, including the
phonograph, the motion picture
camera, and the electric …
User question:
Thomas invented
phonograph, motion
picture camera, …
Generative LLM
Retrieval results
texts
vectors
Retrieval-
Augmented
Generation
LLM-only System
Figure 1: LLM-only system (top) versus RAG (bottom).
only achieves comparable quality with smaller models [18–20] but
also simplifies the process of updating knowledge, mitigating the
extent of additional model training, which is often prohibitively
expensive [10, 21]. These advantages have established RAG as
the industry standard for knowledge-intensive applications, with
notable examples including Google’s REALM [22] and RETRO [18],
Meta’s MARGE [21], Microsoft’s GraphRAG [23], and NVIDIA’s
InstructRETRO [20]. As companies race to integrate RAG systems
into their production pipelines [24–26], optimizing their performance
has become increasingly critical.
In contrast to conventional LLM-only serving systems, which cen-
ter predominantly on optimizing the prefix (prompt decoding) and
decoding (token generation) stages, RAG presents three challenges:
(C1) RAG systems are intrinsically heterogeneous, comprising a di-
verse array of system components, including vector search-based re-
trieval [11, 18, 19], generative LLMs [1, 26, 27], and multiple optional
models such as database encoders [28, 29], query rewriters [30, 31],
and retrieval result rerankers [32, 33]. These components often run on
heterogeneous hardware platforms. For example, retrievals are typi-
callyperformedonCPUservers,whereasMLaccelerators(e.g.,TPUs
or GPUs) are used for model serving. This interplay of diverse compo-
nents and hardware platforms amplifies the search space, far surpass-
ing that of LLM-only systems; (C2) Various RAG configurations de-
fined by factors such as database size, retrieval frequency, model selec-
tion, and serving hardware, exhibit substantial performance variabil-
ity. This variability can veer the bottleneck between inference and re-
trievaloramongdifferentmodelswithintheservingpipeline;and (C3)
A natural consequence of the heterogeneity in components and the
variability in performance is the emergence of a new challenge: how
1
arXiv:2503.14649v2
[cs.IR]
21
Mar
2025
Preprint, 2025, arXiv Wenqi Jiang et al.
can we design efficient RAG serving systems? Addressing this chal-
lenge demands meticulously navigating key decisions in scheduling
policies across diverse RAG configurations and hardware platforms.
To address these challenges in optimizing RAG serving performance,
we ground our approach in three key design principles: (1) Workload
abstraction: Tackling the heterogeneity of RAG systems necessitates
an abstraction to encapsulate the diverse RAG workloads. Without
such abstraction, the inherent complexity of RAG configurations
become intractable; (2) Critical system design decisions: To
unveil the critical system design decisions and illuminate the perfor-
mance trade-offs inherent in RAG serving, a careful performance
characterization of representative RAG workloads is warranted.
Without understanding how these different workloads behave, the
optimization process risks becoming guesswork; and (3) Systematic
optimization framework: To navigate the large optimization space
arising from the Cartesian product of RAG workload and system
design dimensions, an optimization framework is essential to uncover
and exploit efficiency opportunities in RAG serving systems.
TosystematicallydescribeRAGworkloads,weintroduceRAGSchema
(§3), a RAG serving abstraction that encapsulates a set of essential
performance-relevant workload attributes. RAGSchema includes two
key components: (a) specification of the RAG pipeline —document
encoder, query rewriter, result reranker, and generative LLM—
and (b) model and retrieval configurations, including model size,
database size, the number of query vectors per retrieval, and iterative
retrieval frequency. This abstraction simplifies the representation of
complex RAG workloads while providing sufficient information for
performance characterization and optimization.
Building on RAGSchema, we perform a detailed workload char-
acterization (§5) to identify bottlenecks and key system design
decisions. We analyze four representative RAG paradigms, each with
distinct RAG pipeline: (a) RAG with hyperscale retrieval [18–20];
(b) RAG for long-context sequence processing [34–36]; (c) RAG
with iterative retrieval [18, 37, 38]; and (d) RAG with query rewriter
and retrieval reranker models [30–33]. Our analysis reveal significant
performance variability both across and within paradigms, with
a subset of findings summarized as follows. First, bottlenecks shift
between retrieval and inference across RAG paradigms. For instance,
hyperscale retrieval can spend over 80% in retrieval (§5.1) while
in long-context scenarios, retrieval accounts for less than 1% of the
total latency (§5.2). Second, even smaller models within the pipeline
can significantly influence system performance. For example, in
long-context processing, a database encoder that is 100ˆ smaller
than the main generative LLM can become the bottleneck due to
the large number of tokens it must process (§5.2). Third, iterative
retrievals during decoding can stall the pipeline, as the decoding
process waits for retrieval results (§5.3). The insights from these
studies underscore not only the importance of making appropriate
system design decisions but also the indispensable need for a tailored
optimization framework for RAG serving systems, given their far less
predictable performance landscape compared to LLM-only systems.
To this end, we introduce RAGO (Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Optimizer), a system performance optimization framework for
efficient RAG serving (Figure 2). Given a RAG workload represented
by RAGSchema and system resource constraints, this framework
Users
RAGSchema
Resources
Performance
Pareto
Optimal
system config
Optimizing:
RAGO for
RAG serving
Task placement
Resource allocation
Batching policy
Bottleneck
analysis
Figure 2: RAGO for systematic RAG serving optimization.
explores the scheduling policy space to determine optimal schedules
aligned with user-defined performance objectives. Key scheduling de-
cisions of RAGO include deciding whether inference components are
collocated or disaggregated across ML accelerators (task placement),
assigning the type and quantity of resources to each component
(resource allocation), and tuning batch sizes for retrieval and
inference tasks to balance throughput and latency (batching policies).
RAGO uses an analytical cost model, inspired by [39–41], to identify
the performance Pareto frontier and generate corresponding system
schedules. This cost model is based on XPU, a generic systolic-array
ML accelerator [40, 42, 43], and serve as the core engine of RAGO
for evaluating various RAG paradigms and configurations. Below,
we summarize the key contributions of our work:
‚ We propose RAGSchema, a RAG workload abstraction that
simplifies RAG workload representation and enables systematic
performance characterization and optimization.
‚ Using RAGSchema, we identify key system design decisions and
performance trade-offs from characterizing four representative
RAG paradigms and their instantiations.
‚ We develop RAGO, a systematic optimization framework that
optimizes scheduling policies for efficient RAG serving. Our
results show that RAGO delivers up to 2ˆ improvement in QPS per
chip and a 55% reduction in time-to-first-token latency compared
to RAG serving systems built on LLM-only systems.
2 Background
Why RAG outshines LLM-only systems? LLM-only systems often
struggle to achieve high factual accuracy or providing up-to-date
information. RAG addresses these limitations by combining
the linguistic capabilities of LLMs with real-time knowledge
retrieval [10, 18–21, 44–47]. During offline pre-processing, external
textual knowledge is encoded as vectors using an LLM and stored
in a vector database. At serving time, relevant knowledge is retrieved
via vector search, assessing relevance by comparing the similarity
between prompt’s vector representation and those in the database.
The retrieved knowledge is then appended to the prompt, refining
the quality of the LLM’s responses.
By virtue of this combination, RAG systems offer several key
advantages over LLM-only systems for knowledge-intensive tasks.
First, RAG systems simplify knowledge updates by allowing external
databases to be modified independently [18], unlike LLMs, which
require retraining or fine-tuning [11, 18]. Second, RAG reduces
“hallucination”—a phenomenon where LLMs generate factually
incorrect or entirely fictitious information. For instance, a traditional
LLM might confidently assert that “Thomas Edison invented the
internet”, despite this being obviously false. RAG’s reliance on exter-
nal, up-to-date databases helps mitigate these errors by grounding the
2
