Chimera: Communication Fusion for Hybrid Parallelism in Large
Language Models
Le Qin
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
lqin674@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Junwei Cui
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
jcui382@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Weilin Cai
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
wcai738@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Jiayi Huang∗
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
hjy@hkust-gz.edu.cn
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs), exemplified by ChatGPT, have
emerged as a predominant workload in current machine learning
systems. To achieve efficient training and inference within the con-
straints of limited single-NPU memory capacity, deploying LLMs on
multi-NPU systems typically adopt a hybrid approach that combines
various parallelism patterns. This hybrid parallelism within LLMs
introduces a significant amount of diverse collective communica-
tions. However, these frequent blocking communications impose
a substantial burden on the multi-NPU systems. Overcoming the
communication bottleneck is crucial to unlocking the potential of
multi-NPU systems for efficient and scalable LLM processing.
This paper introduces Chimera, a communication fusion mecha-
nism for hybrid parallelism in LLMs. We comprehensively analyze
the communication processes of each LLM parallelism pattern,
identify the communication redundancy in hybrid parallelism and
eliminate redundancy by fusing adjacent communication opera-
tors during parallelism transformation. By reordering operations
and generating redundancy-free communication operator, Chimera
effectively mitigates communication bottleneck in hybrid LLM
parallelism. Our results show that Chimera achieves 1.23-7.06×
network bandwidth speedup. Additionally, the end-to-end perfor-
mance of LLM forward pass and backward pass on different typical
multi-NPU systems achieves respective 1.32-1.58× and 1.16-1.36×
speedups on average compared with those without communication
fusion.
∗Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731025
CCS Concepts
• Networks → Network algorithms; • Computing methodolo-
gies → Machine learning; • Computer systems organization
→ Distributed architectures.
Keywords
Collective Communication, Large Language Models, Distributed
Training
ACM Reference Format:
Le Qin, Junwei Cui, Weilin Cai, and Jiayi Huang. 2025. Chimera: Communica-
tion Fusion for Hybrid Parallelism in Large Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA
’25), June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731025
1 Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable
potential in various tasks, such as reading comprehension [10],
image classification [1], and code generation [9, 27, 68]. Prevailing
LLMs, including BERT (110M-340M) [14], GPT-3 (175 B) [6], LlaMA
(7B-65B) [67], and Mixtral 7Bx8 (7B) [25], have huge amounts of
parameters and their sizes keep increasing at an extremely rapid
pace [5]. Due to the slowing down of Moore’s law, the memory
capacity of one single NPU1 cannot meet the requirement of storing
the whole LLM model for training and inference [59]. Additionally,
the immense computational demands of LLMs render the computa-
tion time on a single NPU intolerably lengthy. Therefore, parallel
processing of LLM computations across multi-NPU clusters has
emerged as a popular solution to accelerate the training and infer-
ence processes [2, 38, 56, 62, 71, 72].
Various parallelism patterns have been proposed by numerous
proposals [32, 35, 53, 62], tailored to the characteristics of mod-
els and systems, such as data parallelism (DP) [62], tensor paral-
lelism (TP) [62], pipeline parallelism (PP) [62], expert parallelism
(EP) [35, 53], and sequence parallelism (SP2) [32], among others.
Each of these parallelism patterns exhibits its own advantages and
1NPU indicates Neural Processing Unit, we use NPU to indicate GPU, TPU and
other DNN dedicated accelerators.
2Since many studies [22, 32, 36, 37, 40] have proposed the design of "sequence
parallelism", we use SP to refer to sequence parallelism in Megatron framework [32].
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Qin et al.
Matmul-A Gating Matmul-Exp
Timeline
Baseline
P2P-A All-to-All-Exp
Matmul & P2P for A
Gating
Kernel Fusion
A-1 Gating Exp-1
Pipeline
A-1 Exp-1
A-2 A-3
A-2 A-3
All-to-All & Matmul for Exp
Exp-2 Exp-3
Exp-2 Exp-3
Matmul-AGating Matmul-Exp
Chimera
Many-to-Many Scatter
Communication
Computation Fused Kernel
Fused Communication
Operator
Legend
Figure 1: Different communication optimization strategies in hybrid
pipeline parallelism and expert parallelism (PP+EP). Communica-
tion fusion can be combined with other strategies including kernel
fusion and pipeline scheduling.
application scopes. For instance, tensor parallelism is designed for
weight partitioning and parallel processing in self-attention and
MLP layers, effectively reducing the memory requirement on a
single NPU. As another example, sequence parallelism, targeting
layer normalization and dropout layers, employs sequence parti-
tioning and parallel processing to reduce activation recomputation.
Therefore, the training and inference processes of LLMs tend to
adopt different parallelism patterns at different layers according to
the model’s characteristics, which is called hybrid parallelism.
Communication in hybrid-parallel LLM faces two key challenges.
First, different parallelism strategies introduce various commu-
nication patterns to ensure data synchronization between NPUs,
leading to complex communication processes and heavy commu-
nication overhead. The blocking nature of these processes even
exacerbates the bottleneck, as computations must wait for commu-
nications to complete before proceeding. Second, the diversity of
hybrid parallelism types, network topologies, and hardware con-
figurations makes developing general and flexible communication
optimizations increasingly important yet challenging. The rapidly
evolving landscape of hybrid parallel training/inference mecha-
nisms [32, 35, 56, 62, 63] and LLM systems [15, 29, 30, 44, 49, 64]
has led to a proliferation of customized communication solutions.
However, these specialized optimizations often lose effectiveness
when models or systems change significantly.
Numerous proposals have optimized the communication over-
head of hybrid parallel LLMs [7, 8, 11, 16, 18, 21, 24, 26, 32, 37, 50, 54,
61, 70, 75]. Some studies adopt fine-grained kernel fusion to reduce
memory accesses for adjacent computation and communication
operators [18, 21, 24, 50]. Some other proposals focus on scheduling
optimization for better overlap between computation and commu-
nication. For adjacent operations that have no dependency, their
sequence can be flexibly scheduled without disrupting dependencies
with other operators [8, 26]. For adjacent and dependent operations,
they are typically scheduled through pipelining in split data chunks
to achieve more fine-grained overlapping [8, 11, 37, 54, 69, 70].
However, these efforts focus on optimizing communication from
the perspective of improving either memory access efficiency or
computational resource utilization, lacking consideration of the
MLP: H→D
GeLU
MLP: D→H
Dropout
Add
Add
Self
Attention
Dropout
LayerNorm
LayerNorm
Input
Embeddings
Output Layer
x L
MLP
Attention
(a) Transformer Structure
Self
Attention
Input
Embeddings
Output Layer
x
𝑳
𝟐
Add & LayerNorm
Exp 1 Exp E
…
MoE
Gating
Add & LayerNorm
Self
Attention
Add & LayerNorm
MLP
Add & LayerNorm
(b) MoE Structure
Figure 2: An overview of transformer and MoE architecture, omitting
residual parts in subsequent discussions since they do not affect
communication patterns in hybrid parallelism.
communication process itself in LLM hybrid parallelism. They are
also unable to effectively address the two challenges mentioned
previously. The continuously increasing data volume is squeezing
the optimization space for kernel fusion and pipeline scheduling,
with communication still resulting in significant time consump-
tion. Furthermore, the ad-hoc nature of these methods leads to
extensive manual customization, making them hard to generalize
to evolving hybrid parallelism. Figure 1 illustrates the timeline for
hybrid pipeline parallelism and expert parallelism, showing that
both kernel fusion and pipeline scheduling struggle to provide
significant improvements facing heavy communication overhead.
Here we propose a novel optimization called communication fusion,
which is different but compatible with all mentioned methods. By
reordering operators and fusing adjacent communication operators,
communication size could be effectively reduced, thus leading to
considerable optimization.
In this work, we introduce Chimera, a communication fusion
mechanism for hybrid parallelism in LLMs. We comprehensively
study the characteristics and costs of communication patterns in
all mainstream LLM parallelism modes. We have discovered exten-
sive redundant communication during transitions in parallelism
patterns. To this end, Chimera eliminates redundancy by fusing
communication operators brought by adjacent parallelism patterns.
For adjacent communication operators in the computational graph,
we directly generate corresponding simplified collective commu-
nication operators. When there is computation operator between
two communication operators, we reorder operators to create op-
portunities for adjacent communications, thereby enabling fusion.
Chimera can be used in both distributed inference and training
scenarios that adopt hybrid parallelism.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
