Hermes: Algorithm-System Co-design for Efficient
Retrieval-Augmented Generation At-Scale
Michael Shen
Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
mts247@cornell.edu
Muhammad Umar
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
mu94@cornell.edu
Kiwan Maeng
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
kvm6242@psu.edu
G. Edward Suh
NVIDIA
Westford, MA, USA
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
esuh@nvidia.com
Udit Gupta
Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
ugupta@cornell.edu
Abstract
The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) as well
as the constantly expanding amount of data make keeping the latest
models constantly up-to-date a challenge. The high computational
cost required to constantly retrain models to handle evolving data
has led to the development of Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG). RAG presents a promising solution that enables LLMs to
access and incorporate real-time information from external datas-
tores, thus minimizing the need for retraining to update the infor-
mation available to an LLM. However, as the RAG datastores used
to augment information expand into the range of trillions of tokens,
retrieval overheads become significant, impacting latency, through-
put, and energy efficiency. To address this, we propose Hermes, an
algorithm-systems co-design framework that addresses the unique
bottlenecks of large-scale RAG systems. Hermes mitigates retrieval
latency by partitioning and distributing datastores across multi-
ple nodes, while also enhancing throughput and energy efficiency
through an intelligent hierarchical search that dynamically directs
queries to optimized subsets of the datastore. On open-source RAG
datastores and models, we demonstrate Hermes optimizes end-to-
end latency and energy by up to 9.33× and 2.10×, without sacrificing
retrieval quality for at-scale trillion token retrieval datastores.
CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Architectures; • Com-
puting methodologies → Natural language processing; • In-
formation systems → Information retrieval.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731076
Keywords
Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Machine Learning Systems, Vec-
tor Search, Large Language Models, Retrieval and Ranking Models,
k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) Search
ACM Reference Format:
Michael Shen, Muhammad Umar, Kiwan Maeng, G. Edward Suh, and Udit
Gupta. 2025. Hermes: Algorithm-System Co-design for Efficient Retrieval-
Augmented Generation At-Scale. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Inter-
national Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June 21–25, 2025,
Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3695053.3731076
1 Introduction
The rapid rise in the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) across
everyday, industrial, and academic domains has fueled an explo-
sion of research in the field. Resultingly, over the last few years,
state-of-the-art LLMs have grown exponentially to hundreds of
billions of parameters, realizing significant accuracy and quality of
service improvements [4, 19]. In addition to growing model sizes,
the number of consumers and enterprise customers using LLMs
continues to grow. The tremendous growth in model capacity and
deployment scale poses new challenges for LLM’s at-scale. First, the
computational demands for retraining LLMs with new and continu-
ally evolving data have become increasingly daunting [19]. Second,
LLMs have been shown to suffer from hallucinations, producing
incoherent or inconsistent outputs [30].
One promising solution to addressing these challenges is Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) [24]. Intuitively, RAG-based LLMs
incorporate real-time information from mutable external databases.
Encoded input queries from users are used as key vectors to in-
dex into and search large vector databases for relevant context via
information retrieval or similarity search processes; the relevant
context and original input query are then provided as input to
LLMs. The use of contextual information from vector databases
allows RAG-based LLMs to (1) produce relevant, current output
without needing frequent re-training, (2) ground generated outputs
to reduce hallucinations (as seen in Figure 1). Relevant contexts are
repeatedly retrieved during the generation process to continuously
improve the quality of the generated outputs, a technique known
as retrieval striding.
958
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Michael Shen, Muhammad Umar, Kiwan Maeng, G. Edward Suh, and Udit Gupta
Question Response
User LLM
Retrieval
Query
Retrieved
Contexts
Context Enhanced
Question
9.3x Speedup, 2.1x Energy Savings
Trillion Token
Datastores
Our Solution: Hermes
- Distributed Datastores
- Hierarchical Search
- DVFS
RAG Inference
Datastore Size
Latency
Retrieval Overhead
Grows Compared to
Inference
Figure 1: Retrieval-Augmented Generation enables dynamic
LLM updates but incurs high latency with at-scale trillion-
token datastores. Hermes addresses this with a distributed,
hierarchical search framework.
While RAG-based LLMs reduce training requirements for mod-
ern LLMs and help mitigate hallucinations, they also introduce new
challenges to efficient deployment at-scale. Primarily, as the size of
knowledge datastores used to augment information continues to
grow, the overhead involved in conducting information retrieval
or similarity search becomes a major bottleneck. Similarity search
on large, TB-scale datastores stress memory systems, resulting
in high latency and energy overheads as well as low throughput.
Additionally, designing an efficient retrieval index further compli-
cates the process, making seamless integration into real-time RAG
applications challenging.
Given the overheads of RAG, systems researchers have begun
exploring methods for optimizing RAG-based LLMs [1, 15–17, 49].
For example, researchers have investigated methods to pipeline
and overlap retrieval and LLM inference stages [16] and cache
frequently accessed documents and LLM prompt computations [17].
While these optimizations are effective for RAG-based LLMs with
modestly sized datastores (i.e., only up to a few hundred billion
tokens), they overlook the unique challenges of deploying RAG
with large datastores (often trillions of tokens in size [3, 41]). For
instance, a recently released retrieval datastore dedicated to RAG
comprises of 1.4 trillion tokens [41], an order of magnitude larger
than studied in prior work. At this scale, we find the retrieval stage
of RAG once again introduces significant overheads, not only in
terms of latency but also throughput and energy efficiency.
In this paper, we introduce Hermes (as seen in Figure 1), an
algorithm-systems co-design framework that addresses the key
bottlenecks encountered in large-scale RAG systems. We begin by
conducting a detailed characterization of the operational challenges
posed by large-scale datastores. Our characterization highlights
critical aspects of the retrieval process, with a focus on memory
usage, latency, throughput, and energy bottlenecks. We then pro-
pose Hermes, which reduces the latency, and memory requirements
of the retrieval stage by splitting and distributing the large datas-
tore across several machines. However, naive distribution of the
datastore requires aggregation of the retrieval across all machines.
Critically, Hermes also improves the throughput and energy effi-
ciency of the system by selectively routing each query to a subset
of machines by ranking machines via a fast, limited-scale sampling
search, all while retaining the accuracy of retrieval. Using this ap-
proach, Hermes achieves improvement in inference time-to-first
token (TTFT), end-to-end latency, throughput, and energy. The
main contributions of our work are as follows:
143
240
997
777
Encoder
ID Text
0.12 ... 0.78
-0.11 ... -0.39
0.40 ... 0.55
0.02 ... -0.22
Embedding Clustering Search Index
(IVF)
Figure 2: RAG datastores encode document chunks into em-
beddings and are used in conjunction with the search index
for efficient retrieval. Retrieved IDs are used to access corre-
sponding chunks.
• We investigate RAG systems from a large-scale deployment
perspective, uncovering significant challenges in trillion-
token datastores, where RAG experiences prohibitively long
TTFT and overall end-to-end latencies, even with enhance-
ments proposed by prior research.
• We propose Hermes, an algorithm-systems co-design frame-
work that reduces retrieval overhead by partitioning and
distributing datastores across multiple CPU nodes, enabling
more efficient and methodical search strategies. By employ-
ing an intelligent hierarchical search that dynamically directs
queries to optimized subsets of the datastore, Hermes signif-
icantly enhances throughput and energy efficiency, shifting
the critical path for RAG from CPU-based retrieval to GPU-
based inference.
• We highlight the performance advantages Hermes offers
over previous solutions and demonstrate how our enhance-
ments continue to deliver improvements even with massive
trillion-token datastores, where earlier proposed methods
have struggled. We demonstrate that Hermes can achieve
up to 9.33× speedup in latency, 9.29× throughput, and 2.10×
energy efficiency improvements over a monolithic large data-
store for context retrieval.
We have open-sourced the Hermes infrastructure, including
index construction tools, accuracy evaluation scripts, and online
serving optimizations. This release aims to support and accelerate
follow-on research on efficient RAG with large-scale datastores.
The live GitHub repository is available at: https://github.com/S4AI-
CornellTech/Hermes.
2 Background: Retrieval-Augmented
Generation
While traditional pretrained language models process queries using
only the information stored within their fixed parameters, RAG
pipelines differ by incorporating a dynamic, non-parametric datas-
tore. Instead of relying solely on learned knowledge, RAG models
query this datastore for relevant external contexts, which are then
augmented with the original query before being processed by the
model. This retrieval step allows RAG models to generate more
informed and contextually relevant responses. This non-parametric
datastore is incorporated into the LLM through 2 distinct stages:
• Offline Search Index Creation: where the dataset is pro-
cessed for relevant information, transformed into a format
959
