DX100: A Programmable Data Access Accelerator for Indirection
Alireza Khadem†* , Kamalavasan Kamalakkannan‡* , Zhenyan Zhu† , Akash Poptani† ,
Yufeng Gu† , Jered Benjamin Dominguez-Trujillo‡ , Nishil Talati† , Daichi Fujiki, Scott Mahlke† ,
Galen Shipman‡ , Reetuparna Das†
† University of Michigan, ‡ Los Alamos National Laboratory

{arkhadem,reetudas}@umich.edu

fact, the first goal of DoE’s next-generation supercomputer, ATS5, to be commissioned in 2027, is “Overcoming the memory wall:
continued memory bandwidth performance improvements for trilab applications” [70].
Beyond high-performance computing, indirect memory accesses,
where memory address depends on another load (e.g., A[B[i]]),
are common in several data-intensive workloads. These accesses
are employed in sparse linear algebra [30, 66] and machine learning
applications [38] to use sparse data structures such as CSR and CSC,
graph analytics [15, 22, 74, 111, 128] to traverse graph nodes and
edges, and in-memory database applications [11, 12] to join tables
using hash-join algorithms.
Memory bandwidth is crucial for the performance of these applications, as indirect accesses often miss caches due to low spatial and
temporal locality. Additionally, these accesses exhibit poor memory
bandwidth utilization on multi-core systems for several reasons:
First, subsequent indirect loads often access non-contiguous memory locations in different DRAM rows. Further, concurrent memory
requests from multiple cores to different rows of the same bank lead
to row conflicts. Therefore, the DRAM row-buffer hit rate drops
significantly. Second, memory-level parallelism (MLP) is constrained
by structural limitations within the core and memory system [13],
such as ROB, LSQ, and cache MSHRs. Additionally, indirect accesses
depend on prior memory accesses and address calculation instructions, creating a chain of dependencies and limiting outstanding
loads and stores in the core [14]. As a result, DRAM controllers
have limited visibility to future accesses, hindering their ability to
optimize the order of DRAM commands and improve bandwidth
utilization [47, 49, 73, 85, 102, 103, 108]. Previous approaches such
as runahead execution [29, 39, 84, 86] enhance the memory access
latency by improving cache hit rate but remain bounded by core’s
structural limitations.
The research community has focused extensively on compute
acceleration [24–26, 32, 36, 38, 40, 69, 95, 96, 99, 101, 134], but less
attention has been paid to building accelerator architectures for
data access [65, 123, 130]. Data-centric accelerator solutions can
enrich future computing systems especially when memory access
and data movement costs dominate [45]. This work proposes
DX100, a programmable data access accelerator that enables
the offloading of bulk indirect loads, stores, and read-modifywrite (RMW) operations. Accelerating bulk memory accesses
using DX100 significantly reduces the core’s instruction footprint.
More importantly, to enhance the memory bandwidth utilization,
DX100 is inspired by the following key ideas: (a) Offloading indirect memory accesses and address calculation instructions to an
accelerator near the memory controllers improves the effective
memory-level parallelism. (b) Indirect address issue to DRAM can

arXiv:2505.23073v1 [cs.AR] 29 May 2025

Abstract
Indirect memory accesses frequently appear in applications where
memory bandwidth is a critical bottleneck. Prior indirect memory
access proposals, such as indirect prefetchers, runahead execution,
fetchers, and decoupled access/execute architectures, primarily focus on improving memory access latency by loading data ahead of
computation but still rely on the DRAM controllers to reorder memory requests and enhance memory bandwidth utilization. DRAM
controllers have limited visibility to future memory accesses due
to the small capacity of request buffers and the restricted memorylevel parallelism of conventional core and memory systems.
We introduce DX100, a programmable data access accelerator for
indirect memory accesses. DX100 is shared across cores to offload
bulk indirect memory accesses and associated address calculation
operations. DX100 reorders, interleaves, and coalesces memory requests to improve DRAM row-buffer hit rate and memory bandwidth utilization. DX100 provides a general-purpose ISA to support
diverse access types, loop patterns, conditional accesses, and address calculations. To support this accelerator without significant
programming efforts, we discuss a set of MLIR compiler passes that
automatically transform legacy code to utilize DX100. Experimental evaluations on 12 benchmarks spanning scientific computing,
database, and graph applications show that DX100 achieves performance improvements of 2.6× over a multicore baseline and 2.0×
over the state-of-the-art indirect prefetcher.

1

Introduction

Scientific and engineering simulations are critical tools used in
nuclear security, materials research, energy production, aerospace,
and the basic sciences [113]. Many of these simulations routinely
require weeks or even months to complete on the largest-scale
supercomputers in the world, primarily bottlenecked by data access
with very low arithmetic intensity. For instance, state-of-the-art
Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) simulations [20, 34] demand ≈2
PB of memory and heavily rely on sparse data structures, with over
50% of instructions involving indirect memory accesses [112]. In
*Alireza Khadem and Kamalavasan Kamalakkannan are co-first authors.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialShareAlike 4.0 International License.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not
for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in Proceedings of
the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June
21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/2025/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731015
1

ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

Khadem et al.

be optimized for bulk memory operations by leveraging the visibility of a large window of indices. Consider a bulk access A[B[i]] for
i ranging from 0 to 16K. DX100 has the visibility of all 16K indices
after fetching them. So, DX100 reorders them to improve the rowbuffer hit rate, coalesces them to reduce accesses, and interleaves
them to enhance DRAM channel and bank-group interleaving.
DX100 provides a general-purpose ISA with eight instructions
to support a diverse set of loop patterns (single and range), loop
condition patterns, multiple levels of indirection, address calculation operations (scalar and vector), and access types (load, store,
and RMW ). To enable these instructions, DX100 integrates four
functional units: (a) Stream unit handles streaming loads and stores,
(b) Indirect unit manages indirect loads, stores, and RMWs while
facilitating reordering, coalescing, and interleaving for improving
memory bandwidth utilization, (c) Range Fuser unit supports merging range loops to enable bulk access, and (d) ALU unit performs
comparison and arithmetic operations. A scratchpad unit stores
the intermediate data and facilitates the communication between
DX100’s functional units and the CPU cores. While DX100 provides
a flexible ISA, re-developing legacy code with these APIs could
be cumbersome. Therefore, we develop a compiler infrastructure
using the MLIR framework [63] and Polygeist [77] to automatically
detect arbitrary indirect memory accesses within legacy code, hoist
them, and transform them into DX100 instructions.
Similar to DX100, Fetcher units [65, 130] and Decoupled Access
Execute (DAE) architectures [115] hoist memory access instruction streams and offload them to tightly-coupled access coprocessors, improving the core structural limitations. Distinct from these
works, DX100 is shared among cores and directly accesses the main
memory, eliminating the bottleneck of core and memory system
structures. More importantly, these solutions remain bounded by
the random memory access patterns as they do not reorder and
interleave memory accesses across a tile of bulk indices. Consequently, they provide modest improvements in memory bandwidth
utilization primarily by increasing the memory access rate.
In summary, this paper offers the following contributions:
• We propose DX100, a programmable data access accelerator
that supports offloading indirect and streaming memory
accesses. DX100 enhances memory bandwidth utilization
by optimizing bulk accesses: it reorders to improve DRAM
row-buffer hits, coalesces to reduce accesses, and interleaves
to enhance DRAM channel and bank-group parallelism.
• The proposed architecture and ISA are designed for integration with arbitrary applications that can benefit from
bulk memory accesses. DX100 is flexible to support multiple degrees of indirection, diverse sets of loop patterns, loop
conditions, data access types (load, store, RMW), and various
address calculation operations.
• We accurately evaluate DX100 as a memory-mapped accelerator using execution-based and event-driven simulators [21, 71]. We study several benchmark suites, such as
NAS [7], GAP [17], Hash-Join [11], UME [42], and Spatter [64]. DX100 achieves a 2.6× performance improvement
over the multicore baseline and outperforms the state-of-theart hardware indirect prefetcher, DMP [33], by 2.0×.

2 Background and Motivation
2.1 DRAM Organization and Access Reordering
Memory access patterns play a crucial role in bandwidth utilization
due to the organization and timing constraints of DRAM. Figure 1
(a) illustrates the DRAM organization of DDR4 technology. Memory
addresses are distributed across multiple channels, ranks, four bank
groups, and four banks. Each bank consists of 2D DRAM arrays
arranged in rows and columns of DRAM cells. This hierarchical
organization allows channels, ranks, bank groups, and banks to
process different DRAM requests independently. Such parallelism
is essential for fully utilizing DRAM bandwidth.
(a) DDR4 DRAM Organization
Channel 1
Rank 0

Rank 1

Rank 1

2D DRAM Array
Row Decoder

Channel 0
Rank 0

Bank 3
Bank 0 …

…

Row-Buffer

…

Col Decoder
Bank Group 0

Bank Group 3

(b) Reordering Technique
B[i]

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

4

0

2

3

5

6

A[B[i]]
B[i]

Reordering

0

A[B[i]]

Figure 1: (a) DDR4 DRAM organization, (b) memory access
reordering technique for improving row buffer hit rate.
Accessing data in a DRAM bank requires opening the corresponding row. This is done with a precharge (PRE) command to
close the currently open row and then an activate (ACT) command
to open the desired row. Once open, the data is loaded into the Row
Buffer, which enables fast column accesses to the same row. Indirect memory accesses often span multiple rows, missing the row
buffer and requiring frequent row switchings. Row buffer misses
substantially reduce DRAM bandwidth utilization due to the long
timing constraints imposed between the PRE and ACT commands.
To improve the row buffer hit rate, memory controllers often
reorder the outstanding memory accesses as shown in Figure 1
(b). Both accesses targeting the blue row are issued first (A[B[1],
A[B[4]). Typically, this reordering is constrained to a window of 32
to 128 accesses to balance hardware cost and complexity. This window size is not enough for applications with indirect memory access
and higher sparsity, leading to lower bandwidth utilization. DX100
architecture and programming model provide memory-bound applications the opportunity to offload bulk memory accesses to an
accelerator, increasing the reordering window to up to 16K accesses.
Even with ideal row buffer hit rates, interleaving accesses across
channels and bank groups is essential for optimal DRAM bandwidth
2

