Meta’s Second Generation AI Chip:
Model-Chip Co-Design and Productionization Experiences
Joel Coburn1, Chunqiang Tang1, Adam Hutchin, Ajit Mathews, Alex Mastro, Amin Firoozshahian, Amit Nagpal, Aravind Sukumaran-Rajam, Arushi
Sharma, Ashwin Kamath, Ashwin Narasimha, Bhasker Jakka, Brian Dodds, Cao Gao, David Reiss, Deboleena Roy, Eleanor Ozer, Emmanuel Menage,
Eran Tal, Erum Kazi, Feixiong Zhang, Guoqiang Jerry Chen, Hangchen Yu, Harikrishna Reddy, Harish Dixit, Indu Kalyanaraman, Jack Montgomery,
Jian Huang, Jinghan Yang, Jongsoo Park, Junhan Hu, Kaustubh Gondkar, Mahesh Maddury, Maxim Naumov, Mike Tsai, Mohammed Sourouri, Neeraj
Agrawal, Olivia Wu, Olusiji Medaiyese, Pankaj Kansal, Pavan Shetty, Poorvaja Ramani, Pritesh Modi, Raviteja Chinta, Richard Wareing, Roman
Levenstein, Sameer Abu Asal, Saritha Dwarakapuram, Sathish Sekar, Satish Nadathur, Shreya Varshini, Sterling Hughes, Tanmay Zargar, Truls Edvard
Stokke, Tyler Graf, Xiaolong Xie, and Zitong Zeng
Meta Platforms
Abstract
The rapid growth of AI workloads at Meta has motivated our in-
house development of AI chips, aiming to significantly reduce the
total cost of ownership and mitigate risks posed by unpredictable
GPU supplies. At ISCA’23, we presented Meta’s first-generation
AI chip, MTIA-1. This paper describes its successor, MTIA-2i, now
deployed at scale and serving billions of users. MTIA-2i marks a
significant advancement over MTIA-1, reducing the total cost of
ownership by 44% compared to GPUs while offering competitive
performance per unit of power consumption but not relying on
HBM for off-chip memory bandwidth. Although there has been a
proliferation of publications on AI chips, they often focus on archi-
tectural design and overlook three critical aspects: (1) co-designing
and optimizing ML models to work effectively with the AI chip;
(2) demonstrating sufficient flexibility to support a wide range of
models; and (3) during the productionization process, addressing
challenges unanticipated or decisions deferred at design time, such
as dealing with memory errors, safe overclocking, reducing pro-
visioned power, and implementing real-time firmware updates to
mitigate silicon design defects. A key contribution of this paper is
sharing our experience with these aspects, based on our journey of
productionizing MTIA-2i at scale.
1
1 Introduction
AI workloads have been growing at an exponential rate across the
industry. At Meta, our products, such as Facebook, Instagram, and
Threads, critically depend on deep learning recommendation mod-
els (DLRM) [22] to deliver personalized content to users, including
advertisements, short videos, and friend posts. Additionally, Llama-
based generative AI powers various product features, such as image
and text generation for advertisers [2, 3].
The rapid growth of Meta’s AI workloads has motivated our
in-house development of AI chips. Previously, we presented Meta’s
first-generation experimental AI chip, MTIA-1 [10]. This paper
describes its successor, MTIA-2i, now deployed at scale and serv-
ing billions of users. Among Meta’s four major categories of AI
workloads—combinations of training or inference for generative AI
1Contributions: Joel and Chunqiang drafted the paper, while the other authors made
major contributions to developing the MTIA-2i features highlighted in the paper.
MTIA-2i is a large effort, with many aspects not covered in this paper due to space
constraints. Contributors to those aspects are acknowledged at the end of the paper.
or recommendation models—MTIA-2i is optimized for inference for
recommendation models, which currently represent the majority
of inference workloads at Meta.
MTIA-2i has two major goals: (1) significantly lowering total cost
of ownership (TCO) compared to GPUs, and (2) offering sufficient
flexibility to support a wide range of production models. While
ensuring flexibility, our goal is not to stretch MTIA-2i to accommo-
date every model at Meta, as doing so could move it away from its
optimal design point. For models not supported by MTIA-2i, we
can still leverage GPUs available on the market.
We have been successful in achieving both goals. For the models
we have launched into production, MTIA-2i reduces TCO by up to
44% compared to GPUs. Additionally, MTIA-2i has proven flexible
enough to support the latest model architectures developed at Meta,
such as DHEN [30] and HSTU [28], which emerged after MTIA-2i’s
design was finalized and departed significantly from the traditional
DLRM models [22], with significantly increased model complexity.
Without delving into details, we summarize several notable as-
pects of MTIA-2i: (1) MTIA-2i features a unique memory hierarchy,
incorporating a large amount of SRAM and utilizing LPDDR DRAM
instead of HBM. (2) It provides hardware support for PyTorch’s
eager mode, enabling job launches in less than 1 µs. In contrast,
most non-GPU AI chips lack eager mode support and rely on stati-
cally compiled graphs, which limits flexibility. (3) While MTIA-2i
was designed as an efficient, low-power, small form-factor accelera-
tor, its system-level performance rivals that of GPU-based systems.
Specifically, our MTIA-2i-based production server, equipped with
24 MTIA-2i chips, achieves total performance comparable to that
of our GPU-based production server equipped with eight GPUs. (4)
Compared to its predecessor, MTIA-1 [10], MTIA-2i delivers more
than 3x peak FLOPS, over 3x SRAM bandwidth, greater than 3x
network-on-chip bandwidth, 2x DRAM capacity, and approximately
1.4x DRAM bandwidth.
When exploring other AI chips for comparison with MTIA-2i,
we observe that the trend of developing in-house AI chips has
gained significant momentum among major IT companies, includ-
ing Google [15], Amazon [11], Huawei [18], IBM [19], Microsoft [1],
and Alibaba [14]. Additionally, many startups, such as Cerebras [20],
Groq [5], SambaNova [23], and Furiosa [17], offer their AI chips as
alternatives to GPUs from established vendors [8, 16, 24].
Each of these AI chips adopts a design point tailored to its target
workloads and makes distinctive architectural choices. For instance,
1
Model Type Description Model Size Model Complexity
Retrieval Rank initial 1M candidates. 50-100 GB 0.001 - 0.01 GFLOPS/sample
Early stage ranking Rank 10K candidates. 100-300 GB 0.01 - 0.1 GFLOPS/sample
Late stage ranking Final ranking of top 100 candidates. 100-300 GB 0.2 - 2 GFLOPS/sample
HSTU retrieval Rank initial hundreds of Ms candidates. 1TB 10 GFLOPS/request
HSTU ranking Similar to ranking above. 2TB 80 GFLOPS/request
Table 1: Examples of some production models at Meta. Note
that 90% of model size is embeddings.
Cerebras and Groq forego DRAM and HBM, relying solely on SRAM,
while SambaNova employs reconfigurable dataflow. Rather than
focusing the comparison solely on these architectural differences,
our experience of productionizing MTIA-2i has taught us that the
success of an AI chip crucially depends on several aspects beyond
architectural design: (1) co-designing and optimizing ML models
to work effectively with the AI chip; (2) demonstrating sufficient
flexibility to support a wide range of models; and (3) during the pro-
ductionization process, addressing challenges unanticipated or de-
cisions deferred at design time, such as dealing with memory errors,
safe overclocking, reducing provisioned power, and implementing
real-time firmware updates to mitigate silicon design defects.
Despite the proliferation of publications on AI chips [1, 5, 8, 11,
14–20, 23, 24], prior works often focus on architectural design while
overlooking these critical aspects. Therefore, a key contribution of
this paper is sharing our experience with these aspects, based on
our journey of productionizing MTIA-2i at scale.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
summarizes Meta’s recommendation models. Section 3 provides
an overview of MTIA-2i. Section 4 discusses our experience co-
designing and optimizing models for MTIA-2i. Section 5 shares our
experience productionizing MTIA-2i at scale. Section 6 presents a
case study on porting one of Meta’s critical models to MTIA-2i, and
section 7 shows results for MTIA-2i across a range of models in pro-
duction. Section 8 discusses some of the limitations and challenges
with MTIA-2i. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper.
2 Production Models
Before the rise of Transformer-based models, Deep Learning Rec-
ommendation Models (DLRMs) were, and remain, a dominant ML
workload at Meta. Their canonical architecture includes embed-
dings for sparse features (e.g., categorical inputs like post IDs), a
multilayer perceptron (MLP), also known as a Fully Connected
(FC) network, for dense features (e.g., continuous values like ages),
and a final MLP to process interactions between sparse and dense
components. Recently, some recommendation models have adopted
Transformer-like architectures to capture sequence information, sig-
nificantly increasing complexity and parameter size. These trends
have guided our co-design of models and MTIA-2i. Table 1 summa-
rizes some of our current models. We explain each model below.
Retrieval: Retrieval models, positioned at the front of the recom-
mendation funnel, process millions of candidates to narrow the
list to 10K–100K, which are then passed to early-stage ranking.
Retrieval models are low complexity and must operate at very large
batch sizes to maintain efficiency, and they can spend a significant
amount of time on feature preprocessing. Communication between
CPU and accelerator and front end network can become bottle-
necks. Also, unlike early and late stage models, retrieval requires
processing both the user embeddings and ad embeddings on the
same host machine, so this puts pressure on host DRAM, device
DRAM, or both.
MTIA-2i MTIA-1
Technology TSMC 5nm TSMC 7nm
Frequency 1.35GHz 800MHz
Instances 2.35B gates, 103M flops 1.12B gates, 65M flops
Area 25.6mm x 16.4mm 19.3mm x 19.1mm
Package 50mm x 40mm 43mm x 43mm
Voltage 0.85V
Dual rail: 0.67V (logic),
0.75V (memories)
TDP 85W (65W typical) 35W (25W typical)
Host connection 8x PCIe Gen5 (32 GB/s) 8x PCIe Gen4 (16 GB/s)
GEMM TOPS
354 TFLOPS/s (INT8) 102.4 TFLOPS/s (INT8)
177 TFLOPS/s (FP16/BF16) 51.2 TFLOPS/s (FP16)
GEMM TOPS (Sparsity)
708 TFLOPS/s (INT8) N/A
354 TFLOPS/s (FP16/BF16) N/A
SIMD TOPS
RISC-V
vector core
5.5 (INT8), 2.8 (FP16),
1.4 (BF16/FP32)
3.2 (INT8), 1.6 (FP16),
0.8 (FP32)
SIMD Engine 5.5 (INT8/FP16/BF16/FP32) 3.2 (INT8), 1.6 (FP16)
Memory capacity
Per-PE local memory 384 KB 128 KB
On-chip SRAM
shared across PEs
256 MB 128 MB
Off-chip LPDDR5 64-128 GB 32-64 GB
Memory bandwidth
Per-PE local memory 1 TB/s 0.4 TB/s
On-chip SRAM 2.7 TB/s 0.8 TB/s
Off-chip LPDDR5 204.8 GB/s 176 GB/s
Table 2: Specifications of MTIA-2i versus MTIA-1.
Early-stage ranking: Early-stage models further refine thousands
of candidates passed from the retrieval phase, selecting only hun-
dreds for final ranking in the late stage. Some preprocessing of ad
embeddings is required but to a much lesser extent than retrieval.
Memory bandwidth tends to be the bottleneck due to the low com-
plexity and high batch sizes needed to saturate an accelerator.
Late-stage ranking: Late-stage models rank a few hundred can-
didates prepared by early-stage ranking and present the final top
results to users. Due to the importance of late-stage ranking, ef-
forts to improve model quality have led to increases in model
size and complexity. New architectures, such as DHEN [30] and
Wukong [29], show continued improvements in model quality with
greater computational power, reaching up to 2 GFLOPS per sam-
ple. DHEN’s hierarchical design enables high-order interactions,
converting FLOPS into model quality. Wukong extends DHEN by
scaling models across two orders of magnitude. With effective mod-
eling of high-order interactions, more sparse features enabled by
larger embedding tables improve model quality. However, signif-
icant diversity in complexity and size remains among late-stage
ranking models in production, with over 60x variation.
Transformer-like models for recommendation: There is an in-
creasing trend toward incorporating Transformer-like architectures
in recommendation models. For instance, HSTU [28], developed
at Meta, enhances prediction quality by processing user history
in a generative, sequential manner. HSTU employs ragged atten-
tion to effectively manage the skewed distribution of user history
sequences. Consequently, it requires jagged tensor support and
can specialize across varying sequence lengths. Techniques like
HSTU are sequence models working with large effective batch sizes
introducing a 10x–100x complexity increase per request compared
to the most demanding recommendation models. They also tend to
have much larger embeddings, which places significant demands
on memory capacity and bandwidth.
3 MTIA-2i Overview
This section provides an overview of MTIA-2i, focusing on its differ-
ences from its predecessor, MTIA-1, while directing readers to the
MTIA-1 paper [10] for details on shared components. Additional
details on the MTIA-2i architecture can be found in [21].
2
