H2-LLM: Hardware-Dataflow Co-Exploration for Heterogeneous
Hybrid-Bonding-based Low-Batch LLM Inference
Cong Li

Peking University
School of Integrated Circuits
Beijing, China
leesou@pku.edu.cn

Jingchen Zhu

Peking University
School of Computer Science
Beijing, China
zjc990112@pku.edu.cn

Yihan Yin

Peking university
School of EECS
Beijing, China
yyhsess2021@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zhutianya Gao

Xintong Wu

Peking University
School of EECS
Beijing, China
vincent_xt@stu.pku.edu.cn

Dimin Niu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
zechariah0825@sjtu.edu.cn

Alibaba Group Inc.
Sunnyvale, USA
dimin.niu@alibaba-inc.com

Xin Si

Yuan Xie

Qiang Wu

HKUST
Hong Kong, China
yuanxie@ust.hk

SouthEast University
Nanjing, China
xinsi@seu.edu.cn

Houmo AI
Beijing, China
qiang.wu@houmo.ai

Chen Zhang∗

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
chenzhang.sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-batch large language model (LLM) inference has been extensively applied to edge-side generative tasks, such as personal chat
helper, virtual assistant, reception bot, private edge server, etc. To
efficiently handle both prefill and decoding stages in LLM inference,
near-memory processing (NMP) enabled heterogeneous computation paradigm has been proposed. However, existing NMP designs
typically embed processing engines into DRAM dies, resulting in
limited computation capacity, which in turn restricts their ability
to accelerate edge-side low-batch LLM inference.
To tackle this problem, we propose H2 -LLM, a Hybrid-bondingbased Heterogeneous accelerator for edge-side low-batch LLM inference. To balance the trade-off between computation capacity
and bandwidth intrinsic to hybrid-bonding technology, we propose
∗ Co-corresponding authors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISCA ’25, Tokyo, Japan
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1261-6/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731008

Guangyu Sun∗

Peking University
School of Integrated Circuits
Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
for Integrated Circuits
Beijing, China
gsun@pku.edu.cn
H2 -LLM’s architecture and extract its architecture design space.
We further propose a data-centric dataflow abstraction to fully exploit the heterogeneous architecture’s acceleration opportunities
in low-batch LLM inference. Based on the whole design space, we
propose a design space exploration (DSE) framework to automatically find out the optimal design. Compared with existing in-die
NMP-based heterogeneous accelerators, H2 -LLM achieves 2.72×
geomean speedup and 1.48× geomean better energy efficiency. H2 LLM’s data-centric dataflow exploration framework is open-sourced
at https://github.com/leesou/H2-LLM-ISCA-2025.

CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Heterogeneous (hybrid)
systems.

Keywords
Large Language Model, Hybrid Bonding, Near-Memory Processing
ACM Reference Format:
Cong Li, Yihan Yin, Xintong Wu, Jingchen Zhu, Zhutianya Gao, Dimin
Niu, Qiang Wu, Xin Si, Yuan Xie, Chen Zhang, and Guangyu Sun. 2025.
H2 -LLM: Hardware-Dataflow Co-Exploration for Heterogeneous HybridBonding-based Low-Batch LLM Inference. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25), June 21–25,
2025, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3695053.3731008

ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan

1

Introduction

1

a few tens (10-20)

hundreds
Cloud Service

Edge Service
User
Request

Response

LLM-embodied
Management System

App 1

(a) Personal Chat Helper

App 2 …

User n

……
Response

User: How to go from San
Francisco to New York ?

Batch Size

User 1 User 2

User

Interaction
Tokens

Generative large language models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT family [6, 58,
65], LLaMA family [14, 71, 72], etc.) have demonstrated outstanding
ability in a wide range of applications such as chatbot [19, 57], code
completion [9, 17, 54], and many other generative tasks [11, 66,
86, 86]. Apart from being deployed as a cloud service for millions
of users [3, 17, 19, 57], LLMs are gradually sinking to edge-side
platforms to meet user’s requirements for function availability, personalization, and data privacy [15, 23, 29, 30, 42, 49, 53, 63, 75], as
exemplified in Fig. 1. Different from the large-batch characteristic
in cloud-level applications [24, 60], these edge-side LLM services
feature a low-batch property (one to a few tens) due to their personalized nature and require low-latency processing to maintain a
smooth user experience.
Performing efficient LLM inference requires the hardware to
effectively handle its two stages: prefill and decoding. In the prefill
stage, the LLM processes the input token sequence (i.e., the prompt)
in a single step, leveraging high computational parallelism among
hundreds to thousands of tokens. In contrast, the decoding stage
processes one token of each request per iteration, behaving memoryintensive nature due to the low data reuse. To meet such disparate
demands, Near-Memory Processing (NMP) based heterogeneous
architectures have been widely proposed [24, 37, 39, 41, 47, 60, 85].
These architectures combine conventional centralized processors
(e.g., GPUs) with processing engines embedded in memory channels
to accelerate both computation-intensive and memory-intensive
operators. In this way, they have achieved notable performance
improvements in cloud-level LLM inference scenarios.
However, existing NMP designs typically place NMP processing engines into DRAM dies (defined as "in-die NMP" in this paper) [37, 39, 41, 43, 44], providing extremely low computation capacity due to DRAM technology’s scarce logic resources [13]. This
prevents them from fully accelerating low-batch LLM inference:
First, the speedup brought by in-die NMP diminishes as the batch
size increases. At the same time, the limited batch size fails to alleviate the memory-bound issue to the centralized processor in the
decoding stage. Consequently, both the centralized processor and
the NMP processing engines can be sub-optimal in low-batch inference. Second, with the increased arithmetic intensity introduced by
multi-head attention’s variants [1, 67], in-die NMP falls short of sustaining its superior performance to attention operators. Although
a recent work [85] has attempted to enhance the NMP computation capacity, the high power consumption of its underlying HBM
memory makes it unsuitable for edge-side scenarios.
The recent emerging hybrid bonding (HB) technology [7, 16, 33,
55, 79, 84] seems to be a promising alternative to existing methods.
It not only offers considerable bandwidth with lower power consumption than HBM [16, 55], but also enables NMP computation
capacity enhancement by customizing processing engines on the
incorporated logic die. However, there are still several challenges
in designing a hybrid-bonding-based heterogeneous accelerator
for low-batch LLM inference. For architecture design, hybrid bonding’s high bandwidth comes at the cost of controllers occupying a
significant portion of the logic die’s area, resulting in a trade-off
between computation capacity and bandwidth. As to dataflow design, fixed operator mappings [24, 37, 39, 60] cannot fully utilize

Cong Li et al.

LLM Agent Bot
Raw Answer
Tokens

Queries

App n

(b) Virtual Assistant

Knowledge Database

(c) Reception Bot

Figure 1: Edge-Side LLM Services.
the acceleration opportunities of the heterogeneous architecture in
low-batch LLM inference, while the prefill-unaware nature in existing dataflow exploration [47] may hurt the end-to-end performance,
despite its capability in decoding stage acceleration.
To tackle these challenges, we propose H2 -LLM, a hybrid-bondingbased heterogeneous accelerator for edge-side low-batch LLM inference. H2 -LLM is the first work aiming to comprehensively explore
the computation-bandwidth trade-off intrinsic to hybrid bonding
for LLM inference. To this end, we propose H2 -LLM’s heterogeneous hybrid bonding architecture and extract its architecture design space. To fully utilize the acceleration potential of H2 -LLM’s
architecture, we propose a data-centric dataflow abstraction and
extract the dataflow design space. Based on the design space, H2 LLM’s DSE framework can automatically find out the optimal design. To summarize, we have made the following contributions:
• We analyze the deficiencies of in-die NMP architectures and
pose the chances and challenges of hybrid bonding for lowbatch LLM inference on edge.
• We propose H2 -LLM’s heterogeneous hybrid bonding architecture and extract its architecture design space to explore the
computation-bandwidth trade-off inherent in hybrid bonding.
• We propose H2 -LLM’s data-centric dataflow abstraction to fully
exploit the capability of H2 -LLM’s heterogeneous architecture.
• We summarize several takeaways for future heterogeneous hybrid bonding architecture design by conducting case studies in
H2 -LLM’s design space.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that H2 -LLM outperforms existing in-die NMP-based heterogeneous accelerators by 2.72× (geomean) speed up and 1.48× (geomean) better energy efficiency.

2 Background
2.1 Transformer-based LLMs
As illustrated in Fig. 2-(a), mainstream LLMs are built on top of
transformer decoder layers [73]. The token embedding at the beginning converts input tokens to embeddings which decoder layers can
process, while the language model (LM) head at the end translates
output embeddings to new tokens. A conventional transformer
layer contains a multi-head attention (MHA) block and a feedforward network (FFN) block, both of which are accompanied by
normalization and residual layers. In the MHA block, the input
embeddings are first projected to query, key, and value vectors by
three fully-connected (FC) layers (Q, K, V). Then, these vectors are

