MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
B
C = OS(A,B) = AB
(a) Output stationary
C = LS(A,B) = ABT
(b) Left stationary
C = RS(A,B) = ATB
(c) Right stationary
C C
A
B
C stays
A flows
B flows
A stays
B flows
C flows
C
C flows
B stays
A flows
B
A
A
Figure 1: Three dataflows of 2D GeMM algorithms.
GeMM, where a shard is communicated to all other chips. This is
possible because computing one element of the output matrix only
depends on one row of the left input matrix and one column of the
right input matrix. Therefore, 2D TP incurs less communication
traffic than 1D TP. As a result, 2D TP is more scalable for a given
communication cost, or has lower communication cost for a given
number of chips. Moreover, the hardware cost to build a large mesh
is lower than the cost to build a large fully-connected network.
The extra scalability of 2D TP can be exploited in different ways.
For example, Llama 3 is trained using a 16K GPU cluster exploiting
3D parallelism (DP+PP+TP) with only 8-way 1D TP [8]. If we lever-
age 128-way 2D TP instead of 8-way 1D TP, we can build a 16×
larger cluster with 256K chips. This not only attains a larger scale
but also reduces the communication cost of DP. Indeed, because
each chip now holds a shard of 1/128th of the weight matrix instead
of 1/8th, the per-chip DP traffic is 16× smaller than before.
Alternatively, we can keep the same total number of chips, apply
128-way 2D TP, and decrease the degrees of both DP and PP by
4×. In this cluster, the per-chip DP traffic is 64× smaller than in
the cluster using the 8-way 1D TP. As a result of the reduced com-
munication cost and fewer pipeline stages, we can expect a better
compute utilization than in the original cluster.
2.3 2D GeMM Algorithms
2.3.1 General Aspects. 2D GeMM is the heart of 2D TP in dis-
tributed DNN training. While there are a variety of 2D GeMM
algorithms, they share many common aspects. Assume that we
compute the output matrix 𝐶 = 𝐴𝐵 as the multiplication of the left
input 𝐴 and the right input 𝐵. All three matrices are partitioned in
both their row and column dimensions into shards, and the shards
are assigned to a 2D mesh of chips. That is, in a mesh with 𝑃𝑟 rows
and 𝑃𝑐 columns, 𝐴 is partitioned into the shards (i.e., sub-matrices)
𝐴00 . . . 𝐴(𝑃𝑟 −1) (𝑃𝑐 −1). Then, 𝐴𝑖𝑗 is stored in chip (𝑖, 𝑗) at the 𝑖-th
row and 𝑗-th column of the mesh. The same applies to 𝐵 and 𝐶.
2D GeMM algorithms can compute GeMMs in three possible
dataflows [30, 36] as illustrated in Figure 1. In each dataflow, the
shards of one of the three matrices (𝐴, 𝐵,𝐶) remain stationary in
their chips, and the shards of the other two are communicated
through either the vertical (inter-row) direction or the horizontal
(inter-column) direction.
In the output-stationary (OS) dataflow (Figure 1a), the output
𝐶 is stationary, each shard of 𝐴 is transferred to the chips in the
same row (inter-column), and each shard of 𝐵 is transferred to
the chips in the same column (inter-row). This results in 𝐶 = 𝐴𝐵.
In the left-stationary (LS) dataflow (Figure 1b), the left input 𝐴 is
stationary, each shard of the right input 𝐵 is transferred to the chips
in the same column, and each shard of the output 𝐶 is transferred
and accumulated into the chips in the same row. This results in
𝐶 = 𝐴𝐵⊤. Finally, the right-stationary (RS) dataflow (Figure 1c) is
the symmetric version of the LS dataflow, resulting in 𝐶 = 𝐴⊤𝐵. LS
and RS dataflows are equivalent to input-stationary and weight-
stationary dataflows in systolic arrays [24], respectively.
The 2D GeMM communication traffic depends on the dataflow
and the shape of the mesh. Assume that we have a mesh of 𝑃𝑟
rows and 𝑃𝑐 columns and two matrices 𝑀𝑟 and 𝑀𝑐 that flow in
the inter-row direction (i.e., vertically) and in the inter-column
direction (i.e., horizontally), respectively. Each matrix shard must
be communicated to all other chips in either its row or its column.
We can compute the time taken to transfer the shards (excluding
synchronization and other overheads) as follows. For the inter-row
(i.e., vertical) transfers, the time is (𝑃𝑟 − 1) × 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑀𝑟 )/(𝑃𝑟 ×
𝑃𝑐)/𝐵𝑊𝑟𝑜𝑤; for the inter-column (i.e., horizontal) transfers, it is
(𝑃𝑐 − 1) × 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑀𝑐)/(𝑃𝑟 × 𝑃𝑐)/𝐵𝑊𝑐𝑜𝑙 . Here, 𝐵𝑊𝑟𝑜𝑤 is inter-row
link bandwidth, and 𝐵𝑊𝑐𝑜𝑙 is inter-column link bandwidth. We
refer to these times as the traffic costs. The 2D GeMM traffic cost is
the maximum of the inter-row and inter-column traffic costs, as we
need to wait until the communications in both directions complete.
If 𝐵𝑊𝑟𝑜𝑤 = 𝐵𝑊𝑐𝑜𝑙 , the traffic cost is minimized when (𝑃𝑟 −
1)/(𝑃𝑐 − 1) = 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑀𝑐)/ 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑀𝑟 ). However, the values of 𝑃𝑟
and 𝑃𝑐 that minimize the traffic cost may not minimize the overall
communication cost due to synchronizations and other overheads.
2.3.2 Cannon’s Algorithm. Cannon’s algorithm [4] is one of the
first 2D GeMM algorithms. It only works for square meshes. Be-
fore the computation begins, the matrix shards are shifted in a
skewed manner. Then, Cannon systolically shifts the shards (us-
ing SendRecv communication operations) while computing the
partial multiplications. Cannon is the base algorithm for systolic
arrays [14] and 3D/2.5D GeMM algorithms [1, 28].
The major limitation of Cannon is that it has a higher traffic cost
than other 2D GeMM algorithms for two reasons. First, skewing
the matrix shards at the beginning incurs extra communication
traffic that is not required in other algorithms. Second, while differ-
ent mesh shapes change the traffic cost of 2D GeMM algorithms,
Cannon only works for square meshes. Hence, Cannon incurs a
higher traffic cost than other 2D GeMM algorithms when the matrix
shapes are significantly imbalanced.
2.3.3 SUMMA Algorithm. SUMMA [30] solves the two limitations
of Cannon in that it does not need to skew the matrix shards and
it can support any mesh shapes. The pseudocode of SUMMA for
different dataflows is shown in Figure 2a. SUMMA splits the matri-
ces into 𝑃 × 𝑃 shards, where 𝑃 is a common multiple of 𝑃𝑟 and 𝑃𝑐.
Then, it performs communications and computations in a loop of 𝑃
iterations. SUMMA uses broadcast (bcast) and reduce communica-
tion operations on shards across the same row or column. Because
each row or column of a 2D torus is connected in a ring topology,
SUMMA runs ring bcast and reduce algorithms.
For example, assume that we run the SUMMA LS algorithm
(Figure 2a, center) in a 𝑃 × 𝑃 mesh. 𝐴𝑖𝑗 is a shard of 𝐴 located
in the chip at the 𝑖-th row and 𝑗-th column of the mesh. In the
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Hyoungwook Nam, Gerasimos Gerogiannis, and Josep Torrellas
SUMMA OS
for p = 0…(P-1):
A’= bcastcol(Aip)
B’= bcastrow(Bpj)
Cij += A’B’
(a) SUMMA
SUMMA LS
for p = 0…(P-1):
B’= bcastrow(Bpj)
C’= Aij(B’)T
reducecol(C’,Cip)
SUMMA RS
for p = 0…(P-1):
A’= bcastcol(Aip)
C’= (A’)TBij
reducerow(C’,Cpj)
(b) Collective
Collective LS
B*j= AGrow(Bij)
C’i*= Aij(B*j)T
Cij =RdScol(C’i*)
Collective RS
Ai*= AGcol(Aij)
C’*j= (Ai*)TBij
Cij = RdSrow(C’*j)
Collective OS
Ai*= AGcol(Aij)
B*j= AGrow(Bij)
Cij= Ai*B*j
Figure 2: Pseudocode of SUMMA and Collective 2D GeMM
algorithms for the three dataflows. In the code, expressions
with 𝑟𝑜𝑤 as subscript are inter-row communications in the
same column, while those with 𝑐𝑜𝑙 are inter-column commu-
nications in the same row. 𝐴𝑖𝑗 is a shard of 𝐴 located in the
chip at 𝑖-th row and 𝑗-th column of the mesh.
𝑝-th iteration, the following occurs. First, the chips (𝑝,𝑗) for all 𝑗
broadcast their 𝐵𝑝 𝑗 shards to the chips in the 𝑗-th column. Then, in
all chips, the local 𝐴𝑖𝑗 shard is multiplied with the transpose of 𝐵𝑝 𝑗 ,
producing the partial result 𝐶′. Finally, for each row 𝑖, the partial
results 𝐶′ in all the chips in the row are reduced to the shard 𝐶𝑖𝑝
in the chip (𝑖,𝑝) in the 𝑝-th column.
Unfortunately, SUMMA’s one-to-all bcast and all-to-one reduce
communications are inefficient in a large mesh connected with high-
bandwidth network links. Consider a bcast, shown in the left part
of Figure 3. To utilize all the links in a ring (a row or column) during
the transfer, the shard to be broadcasted is broken down into D
packets that are streamed over the ring as fine-grain transfers. The
streaming is done in 𝑃 +𝐷 −1 pipeline stages. There are two sources
of overhead: bubbles in the pipeline and synchronizations. Each link
suffers 𝑃 −1 bubbles—some at the beginning and some at the end of
the transfer. Further, each pipeline stage requires a synchronization
and therefore the broadcast needs 𝑃 + 𝐷 − 1 synchronizations. The
reduce operation has the same communication pattern and suffers
from the same overheads. Since there are 𝑃 iterations in SUMMA,
the total synchronization overhead grows as 𝑂(𝑃2).
2.3.4 Collective 2D GeMM. To avoid the SUMMA’s overheads, a
popular approach is to perform the 2D GeMM using the AllGather
(AG) and ReduceScatter (RdS) [25, 35] collective communication
operations. AG involves the parallel execution of all the per-column
or per-row bcasts. Likewise, RdS is the parallel execution of all the
per-column or per-row reduce operations. We call this approach
Collective 2D GeMM.
For each dataflow of the SUMMA algorithm, there is a Collective
2D GeMM counterpart [25]. The algorithms for the three dataflows
are shown in Figure 2b. For example, in the LS dataflow (Figure 2b,
D
…
2
1
Shard D packets
1
sync
Link 1
Broadcast
Timesteps
2
t1 t2
Link 2 1
…
…
…
Link P …
D
tD
1
…
…
…
P-1 bubbles
D
tD+P-1
AllGather
t1 t2
…
…
…
tP-1
P+D-1 synchronizations
𝒊𝒅
Shard
1 P
2 1
P P-1
3
4
2
P-1 synchronizations
No bubbles
One shard per chip
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
sync
bubble
bubble
bubble
bubble
bubble
Figure 3: Communication patterns of Broadcast and All-
Gather operations in a P-chip ring.
middle), multiple 𝑏𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑤 operations in SUMMA LS (Figure 2a,
middle) are merged into a single 𝐴𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤 operation, and multiple
𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 operations in SUMMA LS are merged into a single 𝑅𝑑𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑙
operation. The computation is also done in a single step rather than
in 𝑃 iterations as in SUMMA.
Using collective AG/RdS communications solves the inefficiency
problems of the bcast/reduce operations. Consider the AG opera-
tion in a ring (a row or a column) of 𝑃 chips, as shown in the right
part of Figure 3. In each of the 𝑃 − 1 steps, each link transfers an
entire shard to a neighbor. Hence, compared to bcast, AG elimi-
nates pipeline bubbles, transfers larger packets, and invokes fewer
synchronizations. The same is true for RdS compared to reduce.
Moreover, since Collective 2D GeMM only calls AG or RdS once per
each direction, its total synchronization overhead grows as 𝑂(𝑃).
Hence, AG/RdS are more efficient and attain higher bandwidth
utilization than bcast/reduce.
The major limitation of Collective 2D GeMM is that it cannot
overlap communications with computations. One cannot apply soft-
ware pipelining to overlap them because there are no loop iterations,
and there are true dependencies between the computation and the
communication operations.
Wang et al. [34] present a partial solution to this problem by split-
ting the collective communication in one direction into multiple
SendRecv communications. Then, by applying software pipelin-
ing, the SendRecv communications are overlapped with the partial
GeMM computations. Such a 2D GeMM is equivalent to a combina-
tion of FSDP [37] and 1D TP. However, this solution can partition
and overlap only the communication operation in one direction;
it cannot overlap the communication operation in the other direc-
tion. To partition the AG/RdS operations into multiple SendRecv
operations in both directions, one needs to use Cannon, whose
limitations are discussed in Section 2.3.2.
3 2D Tensor Parallelism with MeshSlice
In this work, we make two contributions to 2D TP. First, we propose
a new 2D GeMM algorithm that solves the limitations of existing
2D GeMM algorithms. Second, we design an LLM autotuner that
finds an efficient 2D TP configuration for LLM training. The LLM
autotuner optimizes the configuration of the dataflow, mesh shape,
and communication granularity.
MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
Allgather
Compute
Reducescatter
Compute
Commrow
Commcol
Collective
Allgather
Wang et al., 2023
Overlaps only one
dimension
Blocking communications Overlaps both
dimensions
MeshSlice
High sync overhead due
to fine-grain packets
SUMMA
TotalTime TotalTime
TotalTime TotalTime
High traffic due to skewing
and square mesh
Cannon
TotalTime
Skew
Skew
Time
Figure 4: Comparing the timelines of five 2D GeMM algorithms: Cannon, SUMMA, Collective, Wang, and MeshSlice.
Our proposed 2D GeMM algorithm is called MeshSlice. Figure 4
visualizes the timelines of the previous algorithms, and compares
them to MeshSlice. The figure shows the time progression of the
computation, inter-row communications, and inter-column com-
munications. Cannon requires skewing and only supports square
mesh shapes. As a result, it has higher traffic than the other al-
gorithms, which increases overall execution time. SUMMA uses
inefficient bcast/reduce communication operations, which incur
pipeline bubbles and synchronization overhead due to fine-grained
packets. Collective does not overlap the collective communications
with computation. Wang’s algorithm partitions the collective com-
munication in only one direction, so it leaves the communication
in the other direction non-overlapped. Finally, MeshSlice is able to
overlap the communication with computation in both directions
and attains the fastest execution.
MeshSlice OS
for s = 0…(S-1):
As=slicecol(Aij,S,s)
Bs=slicerow(Bij,S,s)
A’= AGcol(As)
B’= AGrow(Bs)
Cij+= A’B’
MeshSlice LS
for s = 0…(S-1):
Bs=slicerow(Bij,S,s)
Cs=slicecol(Cij,S,s)
B’= AGrow(Bs)
C’= Aij(B’)T
Cs= RdScol(C’)
MeshSlice RS
for s = 0…(S-1):
As=slicecol(Aij,S,s)
Cs=slicerow(Cij,S,s)
A’= AGcol(As)
C’= (A’)TBij
Cs= RdSrow(C’)
Figure 5: Pseudocodes of the MeshSlice 2D GeMM algorithm
in the three dataflows.
3.1 The MeshSlice 2D GeMM Algorithm
The MeshSlice algorithm has three characteristics. First, it partitions
and overlaps communication operations in both directions. Second,
it uses efficient AG and RdS communication operations instead of
bcast, reduce, or SendRecv operations. Finally, it supports any mesh
shape and a flexible granularity of communication.
To overlap communications with computations, we need to par-
tition the collective communications into smaller communications
and apply software pipelining. There are two existing methods to
partition collective AG/RdS operations. The first one is to break
them down into multiple SendRecv communications. Wang’s algo-
rithm [34] applies this approach to a single direction, and applying
it to both directions requires using Cannon’s algorithm [4]. The
second method is to partition AG and RdS into multiple bcast and re-
duce operations, respectively. This approach results in SUMMA [30].
Instead, MeshSlice introduces a new partitioning method: parti-
tioning AG and RdS operations into partial AG and RdS operations.
The core of this algorithm is slicing the matrix shards into 𝑆 sub-
shards. In each iteration of an 𝑆-way loop, we apply a partial AG or
RdS to a sub-shard, and compute a partial GeMM. The algorithm
completes when all 𝑆 sub-shards have been processed.
Figure 5 shows, for each of the three dataflows, the pseudocode
of the MeshSlice algorithm running in every chip (𝑖, 𝑗) of the mesh.
Each algorithm executes in a loop with 𝑆 iterations. In here, we
give the high-level intuition of the algorithms; in subsequent sec-
tions, we will explain the operations in detail. In the OS algorithm
(Figure 5, left), for each 𝑠 = 0 . . . 𝑆 − 1, the following occurs. First,
each chip uses 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 to slice its local matrix shard 𝐴𝑖𝑗 along the
column dimension to fetch its local 𝑠-th sub-shard, 𝐴𝑠. Similarly, it
uses 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑤 to slice its local 𝐵𝑖𝑗 along the row dimension to fetch
its local 𝑠-th sub-shard, 𝐵𝑠. Then, each chip collects 𝐴𝑠 sub-shards
from all the chips in the same row and 𝐵𝑠 sub-shards from all the
chips in the same column using 𝐴𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑙 and 𝐴𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤 operations, re-
spectively. Finally, each chip computes the partial GeMM with the
collected sub-shards and accumulates the result into its local output
shard 𝐶𝑖𝑗 . Crucially, the partial GeMM operation in one iteration is
overlapped with the AG and slicing operations in another iteration
via software pipelining of the loop.
We can apply a similar slicing method to LS and RS dataflows.
For each iteration in the LS dataflow (Figure 5, center), 𝐵𝑖𝑗 and 𝐶𝑖𝑗
are sliced along their row and column dimensions, respectively.
Then, the 𝑠-th sub-shards 𝐵𝑠 in the chips in the same column are all-
gathered to 𝐵′. Next, the partial multiplication result𝐶′ = 𝐴𝑖𝑗 (𝐵′)⊤
is computed. Finally, 𝐶′ is reduce-scattered to the 𝑠-th sub-shards
𝐶𝑠 in the chips in the same row. The RS dataflow (Figure 5, right)
follows a similar flow.
Like Collective and SUMMA, MeshSlice can be applied to a mesh
of any shape. Also, we can control the slice count 𝑆 to adjust the
granularity of communication. A small 𝑆 (coarse granularity) re-
sults in a large non-overlapped prologue and epilogue during the
software pipelining. A large 𝑆 (fine granularity) reduces the size of
the prologue and epilogue, but increases the total synchronization
overhead by performing more communication operations. Given
this trade-off, there are different optimal values of 𝑆 for different
2D GeMM configurations and hardware architectures.
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Hyoungwook Nam, Gerasimos Gerogiannis, and Josep Torrellas
𝐴!"
𝐴!! 𝐵!!
𝐵"!
𝑨𝒊∗
𝑩∗𝒋
𝑖
𝑗
𝒂#! 𝒂#(%&")
×
=
…
…
𝐴 𝐵
𝐶$%
𝐴#! 𝐴#"
𝐵!(
𝐵"(
𝒃!(
𝒃(%&")(
Figure 6: Generating an output shard in a 2D GeMM.
The major challenge of MeshSlice is designing a correct and
efficient slicing mechanism. This is not a trivial problem: most arbi-
trary slicings result in an incorrect computation. In the following,
we describe how we implement the correct slicing mechanism.
3.1.1 Mathematical Description of the MeshSlice Algorithm. As-
sume that we are computing a 2D GeMM of 𝐴 ∈ R𝑀×𝐾 and
𝐵 ∈ R𝐾×𝑁 in OS dataflow on a mesh of shape 𝑃𝑟 × 𝑃𝑐. In each chip
(𝑖, 𝑗), the computation result will be the shard 𝐶𝑖𝑗 ∈ R𝑀/𝑃𝑟 ×𝑁 /𝑃𝑐 ,
which is the multiplication of 𝐴𝑖∗ = 𝐴𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑙 (𝐴𝑖𝑗 ) ∈ R𝑀/𝑃𝑟 ×𝐾 and
𝐵∗𝑗 = 𝐴𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤 (𝐵𝑖𝑗 ) ∈ R𝐾×𝑁 /𝑃𝑐 . Figure 6 depicts 𝐴𝑖∗ and 𝐵∗𝑗 for
a given 𝑖 and 𝑗. Then, 𝐴𝑖∗ is broken down into 𝐾 column vectors
𝒂𝑖0, . . . , 𝒂𝑖 (𝐾−1) ∈ R𝑀/𝑃𝑟 , and 𝐵∗𝑗 is broken down into 𝐾 row
vectors 𝒃0𝑗, . . . , 𝒃(𝐾−1) 𝑗 ∈ R1×𝑁/𝑃𝑐 . The figure highlights and la-
bels four of these vectors: 𝒂𝑖0, 𝒂𝑖 (𝐾−1), 𝒃0𝑗 , and 𝒃(𝐾−1) 𝑗 . Finally,
𝐶𝑖𝑗 = 𝐴𝑖∗𝐵∗𝑗 is equivalent to the sum of 𝐾 outer products of the
column and the row vectors as follows.
𝐶𝑖𝑗 = 𝒂𝑖0𝒃0𝑗 + · · · + 𝒂𝑖 (𝐾−1)𝒃(𝐾−1) 𝑗
Our algorithm slices this computation in a loop with 𝑆 iterations,
where an iteration computes every 𝑆-th outer products. For 𝑆=3,
Figure 7 shows the vectors accessed by the first iteration of the loop
(in purple) and those accessed by the second iteration (in yellow).
Algorithm 1 shows the algorithm. For instance, the first iteration
accumulates {𝒂𝑖0𝒃0𝑗 + 𝒂𝑖𝑆𝒃𝑆 𝑗 + 𝒂𝑖2𝑆𝒃2𝑆 𝑗 + . . . } to the output shard
𝐶𝑖𝑗 . The column vectors accessed by this iteration {𝒂𝑖0, 𝒂𝑖𝑆, ...} are
gathered using AG from the shards {𝐴𝑖0,𝐴𝑖1, . . . } in the chips at the
𝑖-th row. Likewise, the row vectors {𝒃0𝑗, 𝒃𝑆 𝑗, ...} are gathered from
the shards {𝐵0𝑗, 𝐵1𝑗, . . . } in the chips at the 𝑗-th column.
𝑖
𝑗
𝒂!" 𝒂!#
×
…
…
𝐴 𝐵
𝒂!$
Iter = 0
𝒂!% 𝒂!& …
𝒂!'
…
Iter = 0
Iter = 1
Iter = 1
𝒃"(
𝒃#(
𝒃$(
𝒃%(
𝒃&(
𝒃'(
Figure 7: Slicing the shards with 𝑆 = 3 in MeshSlice.
Algorithm 1 𝑆-way sliced GeMM algorithm to compute 𝐶𝑖𝑗
for 𝑠 = 0 . . . 𝑆 − 1 do
𝐶𝑖𝑗 += 𝒂𝑖𝑠𝒃𝑠 𝑗 + 𝒂𝑖 (𝑠+𝑆)𝒃(𝑠+𝑆) 𝑗 + 𝒂𝑖 (𝑠+2𝑆)𝒃(𝑠+2𝑆) 𝑗 + . . .
3.1.2 Detailed Implementation of the MeshSlice Algorithm. In this
section, we describe the MeshSlice algorithm presented in Figure 5
in detail, and show that its partial GeMM computation is identical
to the sliced GeMM computation in Algorithm 1. To begin with,
note that 𝐴𝑖𝑗 contains 𝐾/𝑃𝑐 column vectors of 𝐴𝑖∗ and 𝐵𝑖𝑗 contains
𝐾/𝑃𝑟 row vectors of 𝐵∗𝑗 as follows:
𝐴𝑖𝑗 = [𝒂𝑖 (𝑗×𝐾/𝑃𝑐 ), 𝒂𝑖 (𝑗×𝐾/𝑃𝑐 +1), . . . , 𝒂𝑖 ((𝑗+1)×𝐾/𝑃𝑐 −1)]
𝐵𝑖𝑗 =







𝒃(𝑖×𝐾/𝑃𝑟 ) 𝑗
.
.
.
𝒃((𝑖+1)×𝐾/𝑃𝑟 −1) 𝑗







At the𝑠-th iteration of the MeshSlice OS algorithm (Figure 5, left),
applying 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 to 𝐴𝑖𝑗 collects every 𝑆-th column vectors in 𝐴𝑖𝑗 ,
and applying 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑤 to 𝐵𝑖𝑗 collects every 𝑆-th row vectors in 𝐵𝑖𝑗 .
We call 𝐴𝑠 and 𝐵𝑠 the 𝑠-th sub-shards of 𝐴𝑖𝑗 and 𝐵𝑖𝑗 , respectively.
𝐴𝑠 = 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 (𝐴𝑖𝑗,𝑆,𝑠) = [𝒂𝑖 (𝑗×𝐾/𝑃𝑐 +𝑠), 𝒂𝑖 (𝑗×𝐾/𝑃𝑐 +𝑠+𝑆), . . . ]
𝐵𝑠 = 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑤 (𝐵𝑖𝑗,𝑆,𝑠) =







𝒃(𝑖×𝐾/𝑃𝑟 +𝑠) 𝑗
𝒃(𝑖×𝐾/𝑃𝑟 +𝑠+𝑆) 𝑗
.
.
.







If we AllGather (𝐴𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑙 ) the 𝐴𝑠 sub-shards from all the chips in
the same row of the mesh, and AllGather (𝐴𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤) the 𝐵𝑠 sub-shards
from all the chips in the same column, we obtain the following 𝐴′
and 𝐵′ matrices.
𝐴′
= 𝐴𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑙 (𝐴𝑠) = [𝒂𝑖𝑠, 𝒂𝑖 (𝑠+𝑆), 𝒂𝑖 (𝑠+2𝑆), . . . ]
𝐵′
= 𝐴𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤 (𝐵𝑠) =









𝒃𝑠 𝑗
𝒃(𝑠+𝑆) 𝑗
𝒃(𝑠+2𝑆) 𝑗
.
.
.









These 𝒂 and 𝒃 vectors are those shown in Figure 7. Then, comput-
ing 𝐶𝑖𝑗 += 𝐴′𝐵′ is mathematically identical to computing the 𝑠-th
iteration of Algorithm 1.
Our slicing operation may result in non-contiguous memory
accesses. For example, the 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 operation accesses column vec-
tors 𝒂𝑖𝑠, 𝒂𝑖 (𝑠+𝑆), . . . , which are not contiguous in memory. This
is inefficient in most memory subsystems. Therefore, we further
optimize the slicing operations (𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 and 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑤) so that the
𝒂 ∈ R𝑀/𝑃𝑟 column vectors become matrices 𝒂 ∈ R𝑀/𝑃𝑟 ×𝐵, where
𝐵 is an architecture-dependent block size (e.g., a cache line size).
At the same time, the 𝒃 ∈ R1×𝑁/𝑃𝑐 row vectors become matrices
𝒃 ∈ R𝐵×𝑁 /𝑃𝑐 . This design ensures contiguous memory accesses.
As an example, the blocked column slicing algorithm 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 is
shown in Algorithm 2, where 𝑅 and 𝐶 are the dimensions of a local
shard. The block size 𝐵 is determined by the hardware architecture.
For instance, since a TPU accesses its memory via 2D 128 × 8
chunks [10], we set 𝐵 = 8 for TPUs. The user can then choose any
slice count 𝑆 from the divisors of 𝐶/𝐵.
MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
Algorithm 2 Blocked column slicing algorithm
function 𝑠𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙 (𝑋 : 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 < 𝑅,𝐶 >,𝑆 : 𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑠 : 𝑖𝑛𝑡)
𝐵 ← block size for efficient memory access
// Splits 𝑋 by 𝐵 contiguous columns
𝑋′ ← 𝑋.𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒(< 𝑅,𝐶/𝑆𝐵,𝑆, 𝐵 >)
// The 𝑠-th sub-shard has < 𝑅,𝐶/𝑆 > elements
return 𝑋′[:, :,𝑠, :].𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒(< 𝑅,𝐶/𝑆 >)
3.2 The MeshSlice LLM Autotuner
The MeshSlice 2D GeMM algorithm has several parameters that
determine its communication cost and efficiency. First, the shape
of the mesh determines the traffic cost as discussed in Section 2.3.1.
Next, there are numerous ways to partition the matrix into shards
for the chips in the mesh (i.e., the sharding), and a different partition-
ing changes the 2D GeMM dataflow. Finally, we need to determine
the slice count 𝑆 of MeshSlice, which affects the synchronization
overhead and the communication overlapping.
Finding an optimal configuration of these parameters is a hard
problem, and usually relies on human inputs [35]. Manually finding
the optimal parameters needs expert knowledge of the system
architecture and expensive trial-and-error.
To address this problem, we design the MeshSlice LLM auto-
tuner, which can find efficient parameter configurations for an LLM
training. The inputs to the autotuner are the LLM architecture,
the training hyperparameters (e.g., batch size and input sequence
length), and the possible 2D mesh shapes of the cluster of chips. The
autotuner runs in two phases. First, it determines efficient dataflows
for the FC layers and the shardings of the LLM tensors. Next, it
jointly optimizes the mesh shape of the cluster and the slice count
𝑆 of each FC layer, using analytical cost models.
3.2.1 Phase 1: Dataflow and Sharding. The first optimization prob-
lem of 2D TP is choosing the right sharding. Given a mesh, a shard-
ing of a tensor is a mapping from the mesh dimensions to the tensor
dimensions that are to be partitioned. For example, given a 2D mesh
and a 4D tensor, there are 4𝑃2 = 12 possible shardings, since we
need to choose two tensor dimensions to split among the rows and
columns of chips, respectively.
Automatically finding the optimal sharding is difficult for two
reasons. First, there are many choices available. For example, con-
sider a 2D GeMM of two 4D tensors. Since we have two input
tensors and one output tensor, there are (4𝑃2)3 = 1728 possible
sharding combinations. Next, estimating the performance for each
sharding combination is hard. A change in one sharding may in-
duce a different dataflow, require a possible re-sharding due to
transposition, and result in a different compute efficiency. To make
matters worse, we cannot just consider the shardings of the for-
ward computations, but also the shardings of the backpropagation
computations during training.
Choosing a dataflow. In this work, we approach this problem in
the opposite direction: the autotuner chooses the dataflow first and
then determines the sharding of each tensor. Take a 2D GeMM 𝑌 =
𝑋𝑊 , which multiplies the input 𝑋 and the weight 𝑊 to compute
the output 𝑌. There are three 2D GeMM dataflows for the forward
pass computation, as shown in the Forward column of Table 1. The
Table 1: Three dataflows for the 2D GeMM 𝑌 = 𝑋𝑊 . Each
dataflow makes 𝑌 stationary (𝑌-stn), 𝑋 stationary (𝑋-stn), or
𝑊 stationary (𝑊 -stn).
Dataflow Forward Backward Data Backward Weight
𝑌-stn 𝑌 = 𝑂𝑆 (𝑋,𝑊 ) 𝑋′ = 𝐿𝑆 (𝑌′,𝑊 ) 𝑊 ′ = 𝑅𝑆 (𝑋,𝑌′ )
𝑋-stn 𝑌 = 𝐿𝑆 (𝑋,𝑊 ⊤) 𝑋′ = 𝑂𝑆 (𝑌′,𝑊 ⊤) 𝑊 ′⊤ = 𝑅𝑆 (𝑌′,𝑋 )
𝑊 -stn 𝑌 = 𝑅𝑆 (𝑋⊤,𝑊 ) 𝑋′⊤ = 𝐿𝑆 (𝑊 ,𝑌′ ) 𝑊 ′ = 𝑂𝑆 (𝑋⊤,𝑌′ )
autotuner chooses the dataflow that makes the largest matrix of the
three remain stationary. For instance, if the output 𝑌 is the largest
matrix, the choice is 𝑌-stn.
To train a DNN layer, there are two passes of computation: for-
ward pass to compute the outputs, and backward pass to compute
the gradients for backpropagation. A forward pass of 𝑌 = 𝑋𝑊 gen-
erates two backward pass computations, namely backward data and
backward weight. The backward data computation computes the
input gradient 𝑋′ = 𝑌′𝑊 ⊤ as a multiplication of the output gradi-
ent 𝑌′ and the transpose of 𝑊 . The backward weight computation
computes the weight gradient𝑊 ′ = 𝑋⊤𝑌′ by multiplying the trans-
pose of 𝑋 and 𝑌′. The compute and communication demands of
each of the backward data and the backward weight computations
are almost identical to those of the forward pass.
Given the forward pass dataflow, the autotuner chooses the
dataflows for the backward pass computations from the same row
of Table 1. This ensures the following properties. First, the largest
matrix remains stationary in all three (forward and two backward)
computations. Also, each matrix and its gradient matrix flow in
the same direction in all three computations. Finally, none of the
matrices needs to be transposed to compute the backward pass.
As an example, assume we choose the 𝑋-stn dataflow for the
forward pass (𝑌 = 𝐿𝑆(𝑋,𝑊 ⊤)). Hereby𝑊 ⊤ is statically transposed
during its initialization. In the forward computation, 𝑌 flows hori-
zontally, and 𝑊 ⊤ flows vertically. The dataflow for backward data
computation is 𝑋′ = 𝑂𝑆(𝑌′,𝑊 ⊤). As with the forward pass, 𝑋′
is stationary, 𝑌′ flows horizontally, and 𝑊 ⊤ flows vertically. The
dataflow for backward weight computation is 𝑊 ′⊤ = 𝑅𝑆(𝑌′,𝑋),
which makes 𝑋 be stationary, 𝑌′ flow horizontally, and 𝑊 ′⊤ flow
vertically. Overall, across all computations, 𝑋 and 𝑋′ remain station-
ary as they are the largest matrices, 𝑌 and 𝑌′ flow horizontally, and
𝑊 ⊤ and 𝑊 ′⊤ flow vertically.
For each row of Table 1, we can transpose all the matrices and flip
the dataflow directions of the two non-stationary matrices to obtain
the corresponding transposed dataflow. For example, the transposed
version of 𝑌 = 𝑂𝑆(𝑋,𝑊 ) is 𝑌⊤ = 𝑂𝑆(𝑊 ⊤,𝑋⊤). Therefore, for
each layer, there are two dataflow choices (non-transposed and
transposed) that make the largest matrix stationary. Finding the
absolute optimal dataflow choices for an 𝐿-layer neural network is
a search problem with 2𝐿 possibilities. Hence, the MeshSlice LLM
autotuner uses a simple heuristic: for each layer, choose the non-
transposed dataflow as a default, unless the layer’s input 𝑋 needs to
be transposed to keep the non-transposed dataflow. In most LLMs,
this heuristic eliminates transpositions between the layers.
Sharding. Once the autotuner chooses the dataflows, the shard-
ings of the three matrices are automatically determined. The matrix
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Hyoungwook Nam, Gerasimos Gerogiannis, and Josep Torrellas
rows are sharded among the rows of chips, and the matrix columns
are sharded among the columns of chips.
In practice, LLMs use 4-D tensors of shape (𝐵,𝑆, 𝐻, 𝐷), where 𝐵 is
the batch size, 𝑆 is the sequence length, 𝐻 is the number of attention
heads, and 𝐷 is the per-head hidden dimension. In an FC layer, the
4D tensor is reshaped into a 2D matrix of (𝐵 ×𝑆, 𝐻 ×𝐷) dimensions.
MeshSlice follows the simple principle of partitioning the two outer-
most dimensions of a 2D matrix. Hence, the 𝐵 dimension of the 4D
tensor is sharded among the mesh rows, and the 𝐻 dimension is
sharded among the mesh columns.
Besides the FC layers, an LLM network has many other op-
erations. The shardings of these other operations have minimal
performance impact as they incur no communication traffic [16].
Therefore, once the shardings of the FC layer tensors are deter-
mined, we let other tensors follow the same shardings to avoid
resharding traffic.
3.2.2 Phase 2: Mesh Shape and Slice Count. This phase configures
the two remaining parameters of MeshSlice: the mesh shape and
the slice count. To this end, we design analytical cost models that
estimate the GeMM execution time for each configuration. Then,
we use these cost models to co-optimize the two parameters.
We construct an analytical cost model of the communication
from offline measurements of the synchronization latency, network
bandwidth, and communication operation launch overheads in a
small ML accelerator cluster. The cost of a collective communication
operation is defined as follows:
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑐ℎ + (𝑃 − 1) × (𝑡𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑐 + 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑)/𝑏𝑤)
Hereby 𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑐ℎ is the overhead of operation launch, 𝑃 is the number
of chips in the row or column, 𝑡𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑐 is the synchronization latency,
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑜𝑓 (𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑) is the size of a shard to be transferred, and 𝑏𝑤 is the
measured bandwidth of a link. This linear model fits well for the
AG/RdS communications on a row or column ring. This is because
in an AG or RdS on a ring (Figure 3, right), the shard transfers are
synchronized and there is no network contention.
To estimate the compute times, our analytical compute cost
model divides the total FLOP count of the local GeMM by the
effective FLOPS throughput of the ML accelerator. The effective
FLOPS is measured by benchmarking a few GeMM operations on a
single accelerator chip. This computation model is accurate enough
for LLM training because most GeMMs in LLM training are large
enough to fully saturate the compute throughput of ML accelerators.
For better accuracy, one can measure the compute execution time
in a single accelerator chip instead of using the analytical model.
For each FC layer, the autotuner breaks down the compute plus
communication execution time of the MeshSlice algorithm into
three parts: prologue, steady-state, and epilogue. The prologue and
epilogue are the operations in the first and last loop iterations, re-
spectively, that cannot be overlapped by software pipelining. For
instance, in our OS algorithm of Figure 5, the two all-gather opera-
tions in the first iteration form the prologue, and the partial GeMM
computation in the last iteration forms the epilogue. We assume
that a communication in one direction can execute in parallel with
a communication in the other direction. Hence, the prologue time is
time of the longest of the two AG operations, and the steady-state
time per iteration is the time of the longest of three operations: the
TPU
Router
HBM
Core Core
control
NIC
4xICIs
2 x 136TFlops
50GB/s
1.2TB/s
Host
Figure 8: Architecture of the simulated TPU.
two AG operations and the partial GeMM. The total estimated exe-
cution time of the 𝑆 iterations is: prologue + (𝑆 − 1)× steady-state
per iteration + epilogue.
Using the cost models, the autotuner co-optimizes the mesh
shape of the cluster and the slice count 𝑆𝑖 of each FC layer 𝑖 using
an exhaustive search. For each possible mesh shape, the autotuner
tunes 𝑆𝑖 for each FC layer 𝑖 by searching through all possible 𝑆
values. Since the optimal 𝑆𝑖 values of the different FC layers are
independent of each other, the autotuner optimizes the 𝑆𝑖 value one
layer at a time. Finally, it picks the configuration with the shortest
execution time. The search space for the mesh shape and the slice
counts is small because there are only a few possible integer choices
for them. Therefore, the autotuner finishes in a few seconds thanks
to the small search space and the simple analytical cost models.
4 Experimental Setup
4.1 Simulation Setup
Our target ML accelerator to evaluate is Google’s TPU [14] because
TPUs can build a 2D torus cluster connected with ICI links. Hence,
we have built an implementation of MeshSlice on Jax [9] that runs
on TPU instances in Google Cloud. Hereby we use Jax’s shard_map
feature to partition the computations into the mesh, and the dy-
namic_slice operation to implement MeshSlice’s blocked slicing
algorithm. This implementation does not overlap computations
with communications because Google only supports asynchronous
(i.e., overlapped) communication for SendRecv operations and not
for the AG and RdS operations needed by MeshSlice yet.
For this reason, for the most part, we evaluate our algorithm by
simulating clusters of TPUs connected with 2D torus topologies of
different sizes and shapes. Figure 8 shows the architecture of the
simulated TPU, which models Google’s TPUv4 [13]. A node in the
cluster consists of a TPU and a host. The TPU has two cores and
a network interface controller (NIC) that share an HBM memory.
Each core has a 64MB scratchpad memory and four 128×128 systolic
arrays to compute matrix multiplications. The NIC is connected to
a router with four ICI links that connect the TPUs in a 2D torus
network. The NIC processes direct communications between the
TPUs. It can directly read from and write to the HBM memory. The
TPU cores and the NIC are controlled by the host and can execute in
parallel. The only performance interference between the cores and
the NIC comes from any contention for the shared HBM memory.
We customize the SST simulator [23] to simulate the cluster and
network architecture. We modify the SST’s rdmaNic simulator to
simulate the NIC. The modified rdmaNIC simulator implements
one controller per each ICI link, so that the four ICI links can
MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
execute communication operations in parallel. The HBM memory
is simulated using DRAMSim3 [18].
To model the TPU cores, we implement a custom accelerator
in SST. We focus on accurately modeling their memory access
behavior, to be able to capture the memory contention between
the cores and the NIC. The simulated TPU takes a GeMM (𝐶 = 𝐴𝐵)
request from the host and breaks it down into tiled sub-matrix
multiplications. An output tile 𝐶𝑡 is computed in a loop, where
each iteration prefetches the input tiles 𝐴𝑡 and 𝐵𝑡 from HBM to the
scratchpad memory, and computes 𝐶𝑡 + = 𝐴𝑡 𝐵𝑡 . We apply software
pipelining in that the prefetches overlap with the multiplications.
Once the loop finishes, 𝐶𝑡 is written back to the HBM memory and
the core transitions to the next tile.
We use the Google Cloud [11] to benchmark four real TPUv4
chips connected in a ring, to calibrate the parameters of our simula-
tor (e.g., frequency, bandwidth, latency, and tile size). We profile the
communication operations to configure the NIC and the router. The
simulator is calibrated until the difference in benchmark execution
time between the simulation and the real hardware is less than 10%.
4.2 2D GeMM Implementations
We evaluate the MeshSlice algorithm against four 2D distributed
GeMM baselines: Cannon [4], SUMMA [30], Collective 2D GeMM
(Collective) [25], and Wang’s algorithm (Wang) [34]. All 2D GeMM
algorithms are executed in two parts: (i) prologue plus epilogue,
which execute the operations that are not overlapped, and (ii) a
single iteration of the steady state, where communications are
overlapped with computations.
As depicted in Figure 4, for MeshSlice and SUMMA, the prologue
plus epilogue are the parts of the first and last iterations that are not
overlapped, and the steady state is the execution of the remaining
loop iterations. In Cannon, the prologue is the skewing communi-
cation that shifts the matrix shards prior to the computation. There
is no epilogue, and the steady state is the execution of the itera-
tions, which overlap computations with SendRecv communications.
For Collective, the prologue plus epilogue are the two collective
communication operations, and the steady state is the execution of
the GeMM without communication. For Wang, the prologue or the
epilogue is the execution of a communication operation that is not
overlapped, and the steady state is the execution of the iterations,
which overlap computations with SendRecv communications.
For each algorithm, the optimal mesh shape is different because
the communication pattern is different. Hence, for fairness, we com-
pare the performance with optimal mesh shapes for each algorithm.
Wang et al. [34] apply loop unrolling to their algorithm to have a
smaller iteration count. This helps the computational efficiency by
merging small GeMMs into larger GeMMs. Hence, we apply loop
unrolling to SUMMA and Wang, as they have large iteration counts.
We set the loop iteration counts of both algorithms to be the slice
count of MeshSlice given by our LLM autotuner.
4.3 1D Distributed GeMM Baselines
While MeshSlice is a method for 2D TP, we also compare it against
two 1D baselines. The first one is 1D TP following the Sequence
Parallelism method [16], which is the most popular method to apply
TP in LLMs. The second 1D baseline is Fully-Sharded Data Paral-
lelism (FSDP) [37], which is a type of DP. FSDP is often considered
an alternative to TP, as it also partitions the weight matrix into mul-
tiple shards and collects the shards right before the computation. It
has a memory footprint similar to 1D TP.
The 1D baselines are simulated on a ring of TPU chips. Hence,
each TPU is connected to only two ICI links. This halves the to-
tal bandwidth compared to a 2D mesh with the same number of
chips. For both 1D TP and FSDP, we overlap communications with
computations using Wang et al.’s method [34]—i.e., their AG or RdS
communications are broken down into multiple SendRecv commu-
nications that are overlapped with partial GeMMs.
4.4 Target LLMs
We evaluate the training performance of two LLM models: Ope-
nAI’s GPT-3 [3] and NVIDIA’s Megatron-NLG [27]. GPT-3 has 175B
parameters and is the most popular LLM. Megatron-NLG has 530B
parameters and requires a larger-scale distributed training.
LLMs follow the Transformer [31] DNN architecture, which
consists of multiple stacks of identical neural network blocks. Each
block consists of two sub-networks: multi-head attention and feed-
forward. There are four FC layers in a block: two in the multi-head
attention and two in the feed-forward network.
For the different 2D GeMM algorithms, only the FC layers have
different implementations, while the other layers remain the same.
Therefore, to compare the different GeMM algorithms, we only
evaluate the FC layers. The other layers are benchmarked with
TPUv4 chips in Google Cloud. They can be benchmarked with a
single TPU because they do not incur communication cost: they
are executed independently in each TPU chip [16]. The execution
times of the FC layers and the other layers are combined to estimate
the end-to-end performance of LLM training.
4.5 Building Analytical Cost Model
The communication cost model is a linear function with three pa-
rameters: 𝑏𝑤, 𝑡𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑐, and 𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑐ℎ (Section 3.2.2). We benchmark the
collective communication operations in 2-chip and 4-chip TPUv4
clusters with shard sizes ranging from 8KB to 512MB. 𝑡𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑐 is set
by comparing the execution times with different numbers of chips.
𝑏𝑤 and 𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑐ℎ are found with a linear regression on the execution
times with different shard sizes.
The computation cost model only requires the effective compute
throughput of the TPU, which can be measured by profiling a few
GeMM operations on TPUv4.
The detailed implementation of the cost models in the Mesh-
Slice LLM autotuner are presented in the source code repository1,
together with the TPU implementation of MeshSlice.
5 Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the performance of LLM training using
different distributed GeMM algorithms (Section 5.1), the autotuner
and the cost models (Section 5.2), and MeshSlice running on a small
real TPUv4 cluster (Section 5.3).
1https://github.com/hwnam831/meshslice
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Hyoungwook Nam, Gerasimos Gerogiannis, and Josep Torrellas
16-Chips 64-Chips 256-Chips
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
GPT-3 (175B) FLOP Utilization
MeshSlice
SUMMA
Wang
Cannon
Collective
1DTP
FSDP
16-Chips 64-Chips 256-Chips
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Megatron-NLG (530B) FLOP Utilization
MeshSlice
SUMMA
Wang
Cannon
Collective
1DTP
FSDP
Figure 9: FLOP utilization of the FC layers with different
distributed GeMM algorithms under weak scaling. The charts
correspond to training GPT-3 (top) and Megatron (bottom).
5.1 Distributed GeMM Algorithm Performance
5.1.1 Weak Scaling Performance. We compare the MeshSlice algo-
rithm to four 2D baselines (Cannon, SUMMA, Collective, and Wang)
and two 1D baselines (1D TP and FSDP). We start by evaluating
the performance under weak scaling, which is the most common
scenario in distributed DNN training. This is because adding more
chips to a cluster results in more available memory, which enables
an increase in the input batch size for faster training. We set the
batch size to half the number of chips in the cluster, and the input
data sequence length to 2048. These configurations are selected to
follow the setup of Megatron-NLG. [27]
We compare the performance of the algorithms in the Fully-
Connected (FC) layers, combining all three training computations:
forward, backward data, and backward weight. We report the FLOP
utilization of each algorithm, which is computed as achieved GeMM
compute throughput divided by the maximum compute throughput
of the cluster (which is 272 TFLOPS per TPUv4). Because all the
distributed GeMMs perform the same amount of compute, the FLOP
utilization of an algorithm is proportional to its performance.
Figure 9 shows the FLOP utilization of the different algorithms
for training GPT-3 (top) and Megatron-NLG (bottom). We see that
MeshSlice is both the fastest method in all cases, and maintains good
efficiency as the number of chips increases. For 256-way parallelism,
MeshSlice is 13.8% and 26.0% faster than the state-of-the-art Wang
algorithm in GPT-3 and Megatron, respectively. If we also include
the performance of the non-FC layers of the LLM models, the end-
to-end speedups of MeshSlice over Wang for 256-chips are 12.0%
and 23.4% for GPT-3 and Megatron, respectively.
MeshSlice maintains high efficiency at 256-way parallelism. Go-
ing from 16-way to 256-way, MeshSlice only loses 16.8% and 5.8%
of its efficiency for GPT-3 and Megatron-NLG, respectively.
Collective is always slower than MeshSlice because it can fall
back to Collective by setting 𝑆 = 1 whenever it is more efficient to
do so. Wang lies in between MeshSlice and Collective, as it partially
overlaps one of the two collective communications in Collective.
The other algorithms (i.e., SUMMA, Cannon, 1DTP, and FSDP) are
Cannon SUMMA Collective Wang MeshSlice FSDP 1DTP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Communication time breakdown - GPT-3
launch transfer sync
Cannon SUMMA Collective Wang MeshSlice FSDP 1DTP
0
1
2
3
4
5
Communication time breakdown - Megatron
launch transfer sync
Time
relative
to
compute
time
Figure 10: Breakdown of the communication time in the FC
layers for the different algorithms relative to the algorithms’
own computation time. The charts correspond to training
GPT-3 (top) and Megatron (bottom) in 256-chip clusters.
inefficient in large clusters. They are even slower than Collective,
which cannot overlap communications with computations.
5.1.2 Communication Cost Breakdown. To understand the ineffi-
ciencies of the algorithms, Figure 10 breaks down their total commu-
nication time (overlapped plus non-overlapped). For each algorithm,
the figure shows the communication time relative to its GeMM com-
putation time—which is almost the same in all the algorithms. The
bars are broken down into three parts: time spent launching a com-
munication operation (launch), transfering the shards (transfer),
and synchronizing the chips (sync). In an algorithm, it is theoreti-
cally possible to hide all the communication time if the total relative
time is less than 1.
Cannon has a relatively high communication time because it
incurs a large traffic cost. Its extra traffic comes from two sources:
the requirement for a square mesh shape and for skewing the matrix
shards. The shortcoming of needing a square mesh shape becomes
more pronounced at large cluster sizes. This is because, as we
increase the cluster size, the weight matrix size remains constant
but the batch size increases—which induces larger input and output
matrices. As the matrix sizes become more imbalanced, the square
mesh becomes more inefficient relative to the optimal mesh shape.
SUMMA has even higher communication time, due to its large
synchronization overhead. As discussed in Section 2.3.3, SUMMA’s
synchronization overhead grows quadratically with the number of
rows or columns (whichever is larger). Its synchronization overhead
becomes dominant in large meshes. Hence, SUMMA is efficient only
in small clusters.
The high communication times in the 1D methods (1DTP and
FSDP) show why we need 2D methods to scale DNNs efficiently.
1D methods are inefficient for two reasons. First, they can only
utilize two ICI links to form a ring topology, rather than the four
links of a 2D mesh. Second, 1D algorithms intrinsically have higher
traffic than 2D algorithms, as discussed in Section 2.2. As a result,
1DTP and FSDP incur higher communication time than 2D GeMM
algorithms, showing significantly lower performance in large ac-
celerator clusters.
MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
12k
12k
256k
12k
36k
256k
12k
48k
256k
20k
20k
256k
20k
60k
256k
20k
80k
256k
256k
12k
12k
256k
12k
36k
256k
12k
48k
256k
20k
20k
256k
20k
60k
256k
20k
80k
256k
36k
12k
256k
48k
12k
256k
60k
20k
256k
80k
20k
Geo
mean
M
N
K
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
GeMM FLOP Utilization
MeshSlice Wang Cannon Collective SUMMA
Figure 11: FLOP utilization of different 2D GeMM algorithms with different matrix shapes (𝑀,𝑁,𝐾) in a 256-chip cluster.
16-Chips 64-Chips 256-Chips
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
GPT-3 (175B) FLOP Utilization
MeshSlice
SUMMA
Wang
Cannon
Collective
1DTP
16-Chips 64-Chips 256-Chips
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Megatron-NLG (530B) FLOP Utilization
MeshSlice
SUMMA
Wang
Cannon
Collective
1DTP
Figure 12: FLOP utilization of the FC layers with different dis-
tributed GeMM algorithms under strong scaling. The charts
correspond to training GPT-3 (top) and Megatron (bottom).
The figure shows that Collective has the least communication
time, as it executes the smallest number of large collective commu-
nications. However, this communication time cannot be overlapped
with computation. Wang and MeshSlice have slightly higher com-
munication times than Collective. Wang has extra launch overhead
to call multiple SendRecv operations, while MeshSlice adds extra
synchronization overhead because each AG/RdS operation invokes
more synchronizations than a SendRecv operation. Nonetheless,
the communication time in MeshSlice can be mostly hidden by
overlapping it with computation.
5.1.3 Strong Scaling Performance. Figure 12 compares the FLOP
utilization of the different algorithms under strong scaling. In the
experiments, the batch size is fixed to 32, which is the configuration
for the 64-chip cluster in weak scaling. While strong scaling is not
a realistic scenario in distributed DNN training, the results pro-
vide some insights. Note that FSDP cannot support strong scaling
because DP assumes the batch size increases with the chip count.
The 16-chip results show a compute-bound scenario. Because
there is not much communication cost to overlap, all the algorithms
exhibit a relatively high efficiency. However, such a compute-bound
scenario is becoming less common, as the compute power of ML
accelerators is growing faster than the bandwidth of ICIs.
In the 256-chip results, the communication cost is now domi-
nant. Hence, MeshSlice’s gain from communication overlapping
Table 2: FLOP utilizations in FC layer training without and
with MeshSlice dataflow optimization in a 256-chip cluster.
LLM Not optimized Optimized Speedup
GPT-3 55.6% 67.4% 21.2%
Megatron 78.2% 82.2% 5.1%
diminishes, and MeshSlice shows a utilization similar to Collec-
tive and Wang. Still, MeshSlice has higher utilization than 1D TP
and SUMMA, which incur more traffic and synchronization over-
head, respectively. Overall, MeshSlice is a safe choice regardless of
whether it is compute-bound or communication-bound.
5.1.4 Performance for Different Matrix Shapes. During the for-
ward and backward passes of the FC layers in LLM training, there
are eight distinct GeMM operations with different 𝑀,𝑁,𝐾 matrix
shapes. Because we run GPT-3 and Megatron-NLG, this means we
have a total of 16 GeMM variants. Figure 11 compares the FLOP uti-
lization of these 16 GeMMs using the different 2D GeMM algorithms
in a 256-chip cluster. We see that MeshSlice is consistently faster
than the other algorithms in all 16 GeMMs. On average, MeshSlice
is 27.8% and 19.1% faster than Collective and Wang, respectively.
The speedups are higher in larger GeMMs, which take longer times
to execute during LLM training.
5.2 LLM Autotuner and Cost Model
In this section, we validate the efficacy of the MeshSlice LLM au-
totuner. The autotuner optimizes three MeshSlice parameters: the
dataflow, the mesh shape, and the slice count 𝑆. The shardings
are automatically determined by the dataflows. We evaluate each
parameter optimization in turn.
The first parameter configured by the autotuner is the dataflows
of the FC layers. Without a dataflow optimization, the default ap-
proach is to use 𝑌-stn dataflows from Table 1 for all FC layers.
This is because the 𝑌-stn dataflow does not transpose any of the
matrices in the FC layers. Table 2 compares the FLOP utilizations
in FC layer training without and with the MeshSlice dataflow opti-
mization. The dataflow optimization brings 21.2% and 5.1% speedup
in GPT-3 and Megatron, respectively. In Megatron, MeshSlice is
already fast without the dataflow optimization because most of
the communication cost can be hidden by overlapping it with the
computation. However, GPT-3 performs a smaller amount of com-
putation because the model is smaller. As a result, some of the extra
communication cost caused by the unoptimized dataflow cannot
ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan Hyoungwook Nam, Gerasimos Gerogiannis, and Josep Torrellas
8x32 16x16 32x8 64x4
Mesh Shape
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
FLOP
Utilization
GPT-3
Simulated
Cost Model
8x32 16x16 32x8 64x4
Mesh Shape
Megatron-NLG
Simulated
Cost Model
Figure 13: FLOP utilization estimated by the autotuner’s cost
models and utilization obtained with simulations, for differ-
ent mesh shapes of a 256-chip cluster.
be overlapped, bringing a significant slowdown over the optimized
dataflow. Overall, the performance gains delivered by the dataflow
optimization of the MeshSlice LLM autotuner are significant.
The MeshSlice LLM autotuner uses analytical cost models of
communication and computation to find efficient configurations
for the mesh shape and the slice count. The accuracy of the cost
models is key to the autotuner effectiveness. Here, we compare
the cost model estimations to the simulation results, to evaluate
the accuracy of the analytical cost models. Note that what matters
is that the models correctly estimate if one configuration delivers
higher performance than another, not that they correctly estimate
the actual performance of each configuration.
Figure 13 compares the FLOP utilization estimated by the auto-
tuner’s communication and computation analytical cost models to
the results obtained through simulations, for different mesh shapes
of 256-chips. The autotuner’s cost models estimate the execution
times of the FC layers. The simulated and estimated execution times
are converted to FLOP utilizations for comparison. We see that the
mesh shape has a large impact on performance: the optimal mesh
shape can bring a 2.4x speedup over a non-optimal one in GPT-3.
From the figure, we see that, for both LLM models, the cost models
accurately identify the optimal shape.
4 8 16 32
Slice count
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
FLOP
Utilization
GPT-3
Simulated
Cost Model
4 8 16 32
Slice count
Megatron-NLG
Simulated
Cost Model
Figure 14: FLOP utilization estimated by the autotuner’s cost
models and utilization obtained with simulations, for differ-
ent Slice Counts 𝑆 in a 32 × 8 mesh.
Another hyperparameter that requires an accurate cost model is
the Slice Count𝑆. Figure 14 compares the FLOP utilization estimated
by the autotuner’s communication and computation analytical cost
models to the results obtained through simulations, in a 32×8 mesh
with different 𝑆 values. We see that the optimal slice counts found
by the autotuner’s cost models are the same as the ones found
by simulating the clusters. Overall, the MeshSlice LLM autotuner
Table 3: FC layer FLOP utilization of 2D GeMM algorithms
in a real 4x4 TPUv4 cluster. MeshSlice-Overlap shows the
estimations if AG/RdS were overlapped with computation.
LLM Collective Wang Mesh- MeshSlice
Slice Overlap (Estim.)
GPT-3 47.4% 47.7% 45.5% 65.7%
Megatron 49.4% 46.4% 47.1% 65.6%
has simple but accurate analytical cost models that can find high-
performance configurations of MeshSlice.
5.3 MeshSlice Performance on Real Hardware
In this section, we run MeshSlice on a real 4x4 TPUv4 cluster. We
note that current TPUv4 clusters do not allow the overlap of AG/RdS
operations with computations—although they support overlapping
asynchronous SendRecv operations as used in Wang et al. [34]. As
a result, MeshSlice is slower than Collective and about as fast as
Wang. Nevertheless, we conduct these experiments to 1) measure
MeshSlice’s intrinsic overheads and 2) validate the accuracy of our
communication cost model.
5.3.1 Performance Comparison on a 4×4 TPU Mesh. The first three
columns of Table 3 show the FLOP utilization of the FC layers
implemented with Collective, Wang, and MeshSlice on the 4x4
TPUv4 cluster. Note that all the FLOP utilizations are lower than
those obtained with simulations in Figure 9. The reason is that
Google Cloud’s 4x4 TPU clusters only utilize the uni-directional
bandwidth of the bi-directional inter-node ICI links.
In this environment where MeshSlice cannot benefit from over-
lapping AG/RdS operations with computations, we see that Mesh-
Slice adds ≈4.5% execution time overhead over Collective. Out of
this 4.5% extra overhead, it can be shown from the traces that only
1.3% comes from the MeshSlice slicing operations; the majority of
the remaining overhead comes from the less efficient fine-grain
partial GeMMs and fine-grain partial AG/RdS operations. Therefore,
MeshSlice’s slicing mechanism is efficient and only adds very small
performance overheads.
Wang is only marginally faster than Collective in GPT-3 and is
slower than Collective in Megatron. Wang’s speedup is lower than
expected. This is because Google’s current Jax compiler optimiza-
tions create dependencies that prevent most of Wang’s communi-
cation operations from being overlapped with the computations.
The last column of Table 3 (MeshSlice Overlap) shows the esti-
mated FLOP utilization in MeshSlice if the AG/RdS operations were
overlapped with GeMM computations. We see that, if AG/RdS op-
erations were overlapped, we can expect 38.6% and 32.8% speedups
of MeshSlice over Collective for GPT-3 and Megatron, respectively.
5.3.2 Validating the Accuracy of the Communication Cost Model.
Figure 15 validates the accuracy of our communication cost model
using hardware measurements. The figure compares the estimated
and measured communication times (overlapped plus non-overlapped)
for different FC layers. We report the total communication time of
one forward and backward pass per FC layer. We see that our com-
munication cost model accurately estimates the communication
MeshSlice: Efficient 2D Tensor Parallelism for Distributed DNN Training ISCA ’25, June 21–25, 2025, Tokyo, Japan
GPT-3 Megatron
FC1 FC2 FC3 FC4 FC1 FC2 FC3 FC4
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Total Communication Time (ms)
Measured
Estimated
Figure 15: Estimated and measured total communication
times of 8 different FC layers in MeshSlice.
times of the FC layers, with only 5.1% average error. The high accu-
racy of the communication cost model is expected because AG/RdS
operations in a row or column suffer no network contention.
6 Discussion and Future Work
This work focuses on applying MeshSlice to a physical mesh of
ML accelerators, which is currently available only with TPUs. To
apply MeshSlice to other types of networks, we can construct a
logical mesh on top of the existing network. This would allow us
to apply MeshSlice to GPU clusters. However, with a logical mesh,
MeshSlice becomes less efficient because AG/RdS operations will
incur network contention that does not exist in physical meshes.
In this case, the MeshSlice LLM autotuner needs to be modified to
estimate the performance impact of the network contention.
In this paper, we have applied MeshSlice to training. MeshSlice
can also be applied to inference. Indeed, the Wang algorithm has
been used in an LLM inference cluster [21]. For inference, MeshSlice
and its LLM autotuner may need to be modified, since inference
computations are more likely to be memory bound.
While this paper focuses on FC layers as used in LLMs, MeshSlice
can also be applied to other types of DNN layers. One example is a
convolution layer, which can be implemented as a GeMM opera-
tion [6]. MeshSlice could also be used for GNNs [15, 32]: there has
been work to perform 2D distributed sparse GeMMs for GNNs [2],
and MeshSlice could be applied to optimize them.
MeshSlice can also be combined with mixture-of-experts (MoE)
methods [26]. Applying MoE in LLMs builds a significantly larger
model and adds another dimension of parallelism called expert
parallelism (EP) [17]. MeshSlice 2D TP could be combined with EP.
All these ideas are possible ways to extend this work.
7 Related Work
There are previous works that try to hide the communication cost
of TP, but most of them target 1D TP. For example, Pati et al. [20]
decompose a 1D TP GeMM into fine-grain computations and com-
munications to overlap them. Centauri [5] applies communication
partitioning and operation scheduling to a 3D training cluster that
uses FSDP+PP+1DTP to efficiently overlap communications.
PrimePar [33] is the prior work most relevant to MeshSlice. It
uses Cannon’s algorithm for 2D TP and adds an optimization al-
gorithm that finds optimal sharding strategies on a given GPU
topology. MeshSlice is a 2D GeMM algorithm that is more efficient
and scalable than Cannon’s algorithm. Moreover, MeshSlice’s LLM
autotuner differs from PrimePar’s optimization algorithm in four
ways. First, MeshSlice focuses only on optimizing 2D TP, while
PrimPar’s optimizer co-optimizes the partitioning using DP, PP,
and TP together. Next, the MeshSlice LLM autotuner optimizes the
cluster topology, while PrimePar works for a fixed cluster topology.
Further, MeshSlice can choose from different 2D dataflows, while
PrimePar only uses Cannon’s OS algorithm. Finally, MeshSlice al-
lows configuring the communication granularity.
To further reduce the communication cost of 2D GeMM, algo-
rithms have been proposed to compute a GeMM in a 3D cluster.
The popular methods are 3D GeMM [1] and 2.5D GeMM [28]. 2.5D
GeMM is the most popular method because 3D GeMM only works
for a cubic 3D torus (i.e., a 𝑃 × 𝑃 × 𝑃 shape), while the 2.5D GeMM
algorithm can work for any 3D torus with a 𝑃 × 𝑃 × 𝑐 shape. 2.5D
GeMM makes 𝑐 copies of the input matrices along the last dimen-
sion to reduce the communication cost. As an alternative, we can
compute a GeMM in a 3D cluster by combining MeshSlice with DP,
where DP also copies the weight matrices along the third dimension.
Because the 2.5D GeMM algorithm is based on Cannon’s algo-
rithm, it suffers from the same limitations: it incurs high traffic due
to skewing and the fact that it can only support a square shape for
the base mesh (i.e., 𝑃 × 𝑃). As an example, assume that we build a
3D cluster of 1024 accelerators and use either 2.5D GeMM or Mesh-
Slice plus DP to compute an FC layer of GPT-3 whose (𝑀, 𝑁, 𝐾)
is 1(1024𝐾, 12𝐾, 48𝐾). In 2.5D GeMM, the only possible 3D torus
shape is 16 × 16 × 4, where the per-chip communication traffic
becomes 1.6GB. On the other hand, with MeshSlice plus DP, we
can choose the better shape of 32 × 8 × 4, and only incur 336MB
of per-chip communication traffic. Therefore, MeshSlice+DP has
much less communication traffic than the 2.5D GeMM algorithm.
8 Conclusion
This paper proposed the MeshSlice algorithm for efficient 2D ten-
sor parallelism in distributed DNN training. MeshSlice solves the
inefficiencies of previous 2D GeMM algorithms: it supports multi-
ple mesh shapes, uses efficient AG/RdS primitives, and efficiently
overlaps communication with computation in both dimensions. We
also proposed the MeshSlice LLM autotuner, which picks an effi-
cient 2D GeMM dataflow and uses a cost model to co-optimize the
accelerator mesh shape and the communication granularity. In our
evaluation, we showed that, in a simulated cluster of 256 TPUv4s,
MeshSlice trains the GPT-3 and Megatron-NLG models 12.0% and
23.4% faster end-to-end, respectively, than the state of the art.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF under grants CNS 1956007,
CCF 2107470, and CCF 2316233; by ACE, one of the seven centers
in JUMP 2.0, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program
sponsored by DARPA; and by Google through the TPU Research
Cloud (TRC).
References
[1] Ramesh C Agarwal, Susanne M Balle, Fred G Gustavson, Mahesh Joshi, and Prasad
Palkar. 1995. A three-dimensional approach to parallel matrix multiplication.
IBM Journal of Research and Development 39, 5 (1995), 575–582.
[2] Vivek Bharadwaj, Aydın Buluç, and James Demmel. 2022. Distributed-Memory
Sparse Kernels for Machine Learning. In 2022 IEEE International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS). 47–58. doi:10.1109/IPDPS53621.2022.
00014
