Resource Analysis of Low-Overhead Transversal Architectures
for Reconfigurable Atom Arrays
Hengyun Zhou1
, Casey Duckering1
, Chen Zhao1
, Dolev Bluvstein2
,
Madelyn Cain2
, Aleksander Kubica3,4
, Sheng-Tao Wang1
, Mikhail D. Lukin2
1
QuEra Computing Inc., 1284 Soldiers Field Road, Boston, MA, 02135, US
2
Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
3
Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA
4
Yale Quantum Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA
Neutral atom arrays have recently emerged as a promising platform for fault-tolerant quantum
computing. Based on these advances, including dynamically-reconfigurable connectivity and fast
transversal operations, we present a low-overhead architecture that supports the layout and re-
source estimation of large-scale fault-tolerant quantum algorithms. Utilizing recent advances in
fault tolerance with transversal gate operations, this architecture achieves a run time speed-up
on the order of the code distance d, which we find directly translates to run time improvements
of large-scale quantum algorithms. Our architecture consists of functional building blocks of key
algorithmic subroutines, including magic state factories, quantum arithmetic units, and quantum
look-up tables. These building blocks are implemented using efficient transversal operations, and
we design space-time efficient versions of them that minimize interaction distance, thereby reducing
atom move times and minimizing the volume for correlated decoding. We further propose models
to estimate their logical error performance. We perform resource estimation for a large-scale imple-
mentation of Shor’s factoring algorithm, one of the prototypical benchmarks for large-scale quantum
algorithms, finding that 2048-bit RSA factoring can be executed with 19 million qubits in 5.6 days,
for 1 ms QEC cycle times. This represents close to 50× speed-up of the run-time compared to
existing estimates with similar assumptions, with no increase in space footprint.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computers have the potential to be a dis-
ruptive tool for scientific discovery and practical appli-
cations [1–3]. Quantum error correction (QEC), where
many physical qubits redundantly encode logical infor-
mation and correct errors, is at the core of realizing this
paradigm: It bridges the massive gap between error rates
required (< 10−12
) [1] and realistic physical hardware er-
ror rates (10−2
−10−4
) [4–6]. Unfortunately, it also comes
with significant overhead, both in the number of physi-
cal qubits required to encode a logical qubit (space over-
head), and in the time it takes to execute a logical oper-
ation relative to physical operations (time overhead). In-
deed, existing resource estimations for large-scale quan-
tum algorithms, such as the execution of Shor’s factoring
algorithm [7] on 2048-bit cryptographically-relevant in-
stances, have ranged from 20 million qubits in 8 hours for
superconducting qubits with 1 µs QEC cycle times [8],
to several years on trapped ions and neutral atoms with
1 ms QEC cycle times [9].
Neutral atom arrays have recently emerged as a
promising platform for fault-tolerant quantum comput-
ing [10, 11], with recent demonstrations of logical algo-
rithms on tens of logical qubits based on a dynamically-
reconfigurable architecture [12]. A particularly power-
ful feature is the control-parallelism afforded by optical
multiplexing: instead of controlling individual physical
qubits, one can directly control an entire block of physi-
cal qubits comprising a logical qubit, allowing the imple-
mentation of transversal gate operations in a hardware-
efficient way. Unlike common gate schemes based on lat-
tice surgery [13–15] or code deformation [16], which re-
quire O(d) syndrome extraction (SE) rounds to achieve
fault tolerance due to syndrome measurement errors,
transversal gates have been demonstrated to enable log-
ical operations with only O(1) SE rounds per gate for
universal quantum computation [17, 18]. This scheme
also supports the use of fast transversal gates within
magic state distillation factories, thereby allowing the
high-fidelity preparation of non-Clifford resource states
for universal quantum computation. With code distances
for large-scale algorithms typically in the d ≈ 30 range,
this translates into a substantial potential saving in the
space-time volume of quantum computation.
With these exciting possibilities, a key milestone would
be to translate these results to large-scale fault-tolerant
quantum computer architectures. There are several con-
siderations that must be addressed. First, the use of
transversal gates influences layout, routing and timing
considerations. Second, transversal gates increase the
amount of errors that each SE round must handle, re-
quiring careful analysis of logical error rates. Third, fast
transversal gates can also lead to increases in decoding
complexity if not carefully managed. Finally, given the
significant impact these factors have on the full compila-
tion pipeline, it is important to reassess algorithmic op-
timizations under the new cost models and constraints.
In this work, we present a large-scale, low-overhead
transversal architecture that addresses these challenges.
Our architecture framework starts from a target quan-
tum algorithm, decomposes it into key subroutines, and
then performs detailed layout and optimization of these
modular gadgets. Finally, algorithm-level parameters are
arXiv:2505.15907v1
[quant-ph]
21
May
2025
2
re-optimized based on the resulting cost of these gadgets,
in order to yield an algorithm execution that achieves
the target logical error rates while minimizing space-time
costs.
Our work makes the following key contributions:
• Efficient transversal functional units for key
algorithm sub-routines. We introduce transver-
sal constructions of algorithmic building blocks such
as magic state factories [19], quantum arithmetic
units [20, 21] and quantum lookup tables [22],
designed to minimize space-time overhead, atom
movement, and decoding volume, while supporting
reaction-limited computation for streamlined execu-
tion.
• Effective models for logical performance in
transversal architectures. We introduce heuris-
tic models for logical error rates in transversal logical
circuits to capture the elevated error due to additional
gate operations and the more complex decoding prob-
lem. We verify this model in key limiting cases and
extract corresponding parameters.
• Optimization of large-scale algorithms on a
transversal architecture. With this framework,
we perform an evaluation of a paradigmatic quan-
tum algorithm as a benchmark, optimizing the imple-
mentation based on the distinct costs and considera-
tions of a transversal implementation. We also eval-
uate various trade-offs and the sensitivity to param-
eter variation, including the effect of replacing sur-
face code memories with dense quantum low-density
parity-check (qLDPC) codes.
• Substantial reduction of space-time cost using
transversal architectures. With these methods,
we are able to demonstrate substantial reductions in
resource costs. Unlike existing estimates [8, 9], which
would extrapolate to year-long computations for typ-
ical neutral atom movement and measurement times,
we estimate that 2048-bit RSA factoring could be per-
formed with 19 million qubits in 5.6 days, represent-
ing a 50× time speed-up with no increase in space
footprint (Fig. 2). We also explain how these savings
will translate to other algorithms, such as quantum
chemistry. It is worth noting that this space-time sav-
ing is competitive that achieved by recent advances in
qLDPC codes [23–26], even without considering the
extra overhead for performing computation [24, 27–
30], and the savings between the methods can likely
be combined in the future.
While our framework focuses on transversal architec-
tures for neutral atoms, we expect our results to be appli-
cable to many other reconfigurable quantum computing
platforms, such as trapped ions [5, 31, 32] and silicon spin
qubits [33]. It also provides a common framework for
which future improvements in algorithms, compilation,
QEC and layout can build upon. We therefore expect it
Quantum
Algorithm
Algorithmic
Building Blocks
Arithmetic
Magic states
Balance Resource Usage and Optimize Layout
Look-up Rot. synth.
H H
T T
Transversal Block Layout
and Implementation
FIG. 1. Illustration of large-scale transversal architecture
and compilation framework. A high-level quantum algorithm
is decomposed into individual functional subroutines, which
are implemented with transversal gates in a space-time effi-
cient manner. Transversal gates provide an O(d) logical clock
speed-up, substantially reducing the run time. The subrou-
tines are laid out and their space-time footprint is further
balanced to minimize overall execution volume.
α = 1/6
pth, 1 round
= 0.86%
Lower space-time volume
FIG. 2. Comparison with existing resource estimates based
on lattice surgery, showing a substantial reduction in space-
time volume. Data from Ref. [8, 9], where we use the attached
files in Ref. [8] to generate the blue points. See Sec. IV.2 for
details of the comparisons.
to play a key role in guiding the construction of large-
scale, fault-tolerant dynamically-reconfigurable quantum
computers.
II. BACKGROUND
II.1. Neutral Atom Arrays
Recent advances in the neutral atom array platform
make it a promising candidate for large-scale quantum
computing. In this platform, qubits are encoded in the
internal states of optically-trapped atoms (Fig. 3(a)).
Long coherence times on the order of seconds to min-
utes [10, 34–37] as well as high-fidelity single- and two-
qubit gates have been demonstrated [6, 10, 38–40]. Two
