Hybrid SLC-MLC RRAM Mixed-Signal Processing-in-Memory
Architecture for Transformer Acceleration via Gradient
Redistribution
Chang Eun Song

arXiv:2506.00020v1 [cs.AR] 20 May 2025

University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
cesong@ucsd.edu

Nam Sung Kim

University of Illinois at
Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
nam.sung.kim@gmail.com

Priyansh Bhatnagar

University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
prbhatnagar@ucsd.edu

Tajana S. Rosing

University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
tajana@ucsd.edu

Zihan Xia

University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
z5xia@ucsd.edu

Mingu Kang

University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
mingu@ucsd.edu

ABSTRACT

1

Transformers, while revolutionary, face challenges due to their
demanding computational cost and large data movement. To address this, we propose HyFlexPIM, a novel mixed-signal processingin-memory (PIM) accelerator for inference that flexibly utilizes
both single-level cell (SLC) and multi-level cell (MLC) RRAM technologies to trade-off accuracy and efficiency. HyFlexPIM achieves
efficient dual-mode operation by utilizing digital PIM for highprecision and write-intensive operations while analog PIM for high
parallel and low-precision computations. The analog PIM further
distributes tasks between SLC and MLC PIM operations, where a
single analog PIM module can be reconfigured to switch between
two operations (SLC/MLC) with minimal overhead (<1% for area
& energy). Critical weights are allocated to SLC RRAM for high
accuracy, while less critical weights are assigned to MLC RRAM
to maximize capacity, power, and latency efficiency. However, despite employing such a hybrid mechanism, brute-force mapping
on hardware fails to deliver significant benefits due to the limited
proportion of weights accelerated by the MLC and the noticeable
degradation in accuracy. To maximize the potential of our hybrid
hardware architecture, we propose an algorithm co-optimization
technique, called gradient redistribution, which uses Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) to decompose and truncate matrices based
on their importance, then fine-tune them to concentrate significance into a small subset of weights. By doing so, only 5-10% of the
weights have dominantly large gradients, making it favorable for
HyFlexPIM by minimizing the use of expensive SLC RRAM while
maximizing the efficient MLC RRAM. Our evaluation shows that
HyFlexPIM significantly enhances computational throughput and
energy efficiency, achieving maximum 1.86× and 1.45× higher than
state-of-the-art methods.

Transformer models have brought significant advancements in a
wide range of machine learning (ML) applications, including natural language processing and computer vision [59]. However, their
high computational cost and memory bandwidth/capacity requirements pose considerable challenges for the hardware deployment,
given the limited resources such as computing capability, memory
bandwidth, energy, and delay budgets [34, 64]. These difficulties
arise from the immense memory bandwidth usage and intensive
data transfer cost required for model operations, making it challenging to process them efficiently with conventional accelerators
such as GPUs and ASICs [43, 55, 56, 71, 75]. As an alternative solution, memory-centric processing architectures have been emerging,
specifically processing-in-memory (PIM) [48, 74, 80]. These technologies eliminate data movement and leverage memory’s inherent
parallelism to enhance computational efficiency. In particular, both
digital and analog PIM approaches have shown significant efficiency improvements - digital PIM reduces data movement costs
while maintaining the accuracy for high bit-precision operations
[16, 24, 32, 58, 60, 68, 79], and analog PIM demonstrates dramatic
efficiency improvement, achieving more than two orders of magnitude benefit [5, 9, 17, 24] through low-voltage swing operations.
To leverage such opportunities, several efforts have explored
PIM techniques that employ DRAM, SRAM, RRAM (Resistive RAM),
PRAM (Phase Change Memory), and other emerging memory topologies [4, 54, 70]. Out of these efforts, RRAM is one of the most widely
explored devices for PIM acceleration due to its non-volatile memory (NVM) nature, high storage density, fast read operation, low
energy consumption, and excellent analog programmability for the
multi-level cell (MLC) [23, 42, 46, 58, 60, 74, 78, 80]. Despite its great
potential in terms of efficiency, practical applications of RRAM for
Transformer models face multiple challenges in terms of its nonideal characteristics and reliability concerns. While digital RRAM
PIM approaches have been actively explored for various complex
models due to their reliability and precision advantages [16, 58, 60],
analog RRAM PIM has been explored mostly in simpler algorithms
such as multilayer perceptrons, spiking neural networks (SNNs),
and convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which exhibit relatively
high inherent error resiliency within the model itself [27, 33, 69].

KEYWORDS
Processing-In-Memory, LLM, AI Processor, Accelerators, Transformer, Mixed-Signal, RRAM

INTRODUCTION

Chang Eun Song, Priyansh Bhatnagar, Zihan Xia, Nam Sung Kim, Tajana S. Rosing, and Mingu Kang

On the other hand, Transformer models consist of many cascaded
layers and often require high bit precision for specific operations,
making them sensitive to noise sources and resulting in immediate accuracy degradation from such noise. Due to these accuracy
concerns, a large body of work [32, 68, 79] has explored digital PIM
solutions for processing Transformers while reducing data movement costs. However, it has shown limited improvement due to less
parallelism in General matrix-vector multiplications (GEMV) operations than analog PIMs [72], falling short of fully leveraging the
substantial potential for energy and delay efficiency offered by lowswing analog operations. SPIRNT [75] explored analog PIM within
a limited scope, using it as a pre-processor before the main digital
processing to filter redundant tokens by calculating the correlation
scores between all query and key pairs in the RRAM array. Despite
a few analog efforts, the study of analog PIM acceleration for Transformers remains largely unexplored, mainly due to concerns about
accuracy degradation.
One of the main advantages of analog RRAM PIM is its ability
to support multi-level cell (MLC) programming, where multiple
bits of information (2 to 6-bits) can be stored per cell based on programmable resistance levels, unlike single-level cell (SLC) which
stores only a single bit (e.g., high vs. low). In addition, PIM with MLC
achieves higher computing throughput as each memory cell processes multiple bits simultaneously. Despite above advantages, the
inherent non-linearity in MLC operations leads to severe accuracy
degradation. Our experiments demonstrate that even the simplest
Transformer models [12] suffer catastrophic accuracy loss when
implemented entirely with 2-bit MLC, e.g., 40% drop for BERT-Base
with GLUE MRPC dataset.
In contrast, SLC offers a much higher noise margin against data
distortion, ensuring better accuracy but at the cost of significantly
greater area and energy overhead. Exploiting both types of devices
(SLC & MLC) in a single hardware offers a great knob to trade-off
between efficiency and accuracy by containing the critical contents
in the SLC while less important and error-tolerant data in the
MLC. To unlock the true potential of enhanced efficiency and large
capacity from analog PIM, it is desirable to process a dominant
portion of data in the MLC. However, applying these methods to
Transformer encounters two major challenges: 1) the error-tolerant
portion to be processed in MLC is often not sufficient enough so
that the acceleration offered by the hybrid architecture does not
lead to a significant improvement in efficiency, and 2) even when
this is not the case, it is hard to clearly demarcate which part is
error-tolerant vs. error-susceptible.
This work aims to tackle these challenges at the intersection
of hardware & software by introducing a novel hybrid SLC-MLC
RRAM mixed-signal architecture, termed HyFlexPIM along with
an algorithmic transformation called gradient redistribution. HyFlexPIM exhibits three key characteristics (1) mixed-signal, leveraging
both digital & analog PIM computations, (2) Hybrid, further dividing the analog PIM into SLC and MLC RRAM operations given the
accuracy requirement, and (3) Flexible, enabling seamless switching between SLC-MLC configurations in a single PIM unit.
On the software side, our proposed gradient redistribution technique reshapes Transformer models without accuracy compromise
to be more compatible with the hybrid hardware platform, rather

than passively relying on the inherent error resiliency of the model
itself. In this approach, we accomplish these goals by employing
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to decompose matrices based
on their order of importance. After truncating the post-SVD matrix
to remove redundancy, we fine-tune it so that a small portion of the
weights have dominant importance. This approach will not only
facilitate a clear demarcation between critical and error-tolerant sections of the task but will also enhance the size of the error-tolerant
section for efficient hardware mapping, thereby maximizing the use
of low-power analog processing in the MLC while achieving higher
storage density and improved computational throughput. All SVD
decomposition, truncation, and fine-tuning are performed entirely
in the software in advance. Meanwhile, the hardware, featuring
reconfigurability for hybrid SLC-MLC operations, only utilizes the
final truncated matrices for GEMV operations for inference, resulting in lower computing and storage costs.
Our detailed contributions are as follows:
• We introduce architectural and circuit-level hardware designs
to support the dual-tier approach, facilitating importance-based
data flow with hybrid SLC-MLC RRAM mixed-signal PIM and a
reconfigurable ADC for dynamic precision.
• The gradient redistribution technique allows us to protect only
the most important 5-10% & 5-20% of weights by storing them in
the SLC for the encoder & decoder models, respectively, to achieve
high precision while most weights are processed in the MLC.
• We performed accuracy analysis by employing realistic circuit
error models to reflect the non-idealities of real RRAM devices [15],
peripheral circuitry, and the detailed computational and data flow.
• We conducted extensive experiments on various benchmarks, including both encoder-based, decoder-based, and vision transformer
models such as BERT [12], GPT-2 [45], Llama3 [3], and ViT-Base
[14] with multiple datasets of GLUE (7 tasks) [63], WikiText-2 [37],
PTB [36], and CIFAR-10 [28].
The results indicate that HyFlexPIM exhibits superior throughput and energy efficiency of maximum 1.86× and 1.24× compared
to state-of-the-art (SoA) methods [31], with negligible accuracy
repercussions (less than 1%) in the encoder model and vision transformer and loss increase (less than 10% of loss) in decoder model,
on average.

2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
2.1 Transformer
Figure 1 illustrates the computing stages of an end-to-end Transformer encoder and decoder, which consist of multiple blocks internally. Attention-based models fundamentally consist of two primary
modules: Multi-Head Attention (MHA) and Feed Forward Network
(FFN). The attention mechanism is designed to selectively focus
on a subset of segments in the input sequence while generating
an output. The core concept involves computing a weighted sum
of values (V), where the weights are determined by the similarity
between a query (Q) and a set of keys (K). This process can be
mathematically represented as follows:
Q = WQ (𝑥),

K = WK (𝑥),

V = WV (𝑥)

(1)

where Q, K, and V are 𝐿 ×𝐷ℎ dimensional matrices with 𝐿 representing the sequence length, 𝐷ℎ as hidden dimension, and 𝑥 as input

