CIPHERMATCH: Accelerating Homomorphic Encryption-Based String Matching
via Memory-Efficient Data Packing and In-Flash Processing
Mayank Kabra† Rakesh Nadig†
Vamanan Arulchelvan† Yu Liang†

Harshita Gupta† Rahul Bera† Manos Frouzakis†
Haiyu Mao‡ Mohammad Sadrosadati† Onur Mutlu†

arXiv:2503.08968v1 [cs.CR] 12 Mar 2025

ETH Zurich†

King’s College London‡
format). Since cloud servers can be shared among multiple
users, sensitive user data can become vulnerable to security
threats and leaks [24–26]. HE can significantly benefit privacysensitive applications [27–31] that require exact string matching
[13–17, 19, 21–23] as the fundamental operation by directly operating on encrypted data without requiring decryption.
Unfortunately, homomorphic operations are typically 104 ×
to 105 × slower than their traditional unencrypted counterparts
in existing systems [32]. Prior works propose two main approaches to perform secure string matching: (1) the Boolean
approach (e.g., [17, 33]), and (2) the arithmetic approach
(e.g., [27,29,34]). The Boolean approach [17,33] packs individual bits into a polynomial, encrypts it, and uses homomorphic
XNOR and AND operations to perform secure string matching on a search pattern of any size. In contrast, the arithmetic
approach [27, 29, 34] packs multiple bits into a polynomial, encrypts it, and employs homomorphic multiplication and addition
operations to compute the Hamming Distance (HD) [35] for
approximate or exact secure string matching on search patterns
of only specific sizes (see §2.2 for more detail).
Despite recent performance improvements in accelerating HE
operations (e.g., [32, 36, 37]), we make two key observations
from prior works on secure string matching [17, 27, 29, 33, 34]
that highlight opportunities for significant performance improvement. First, prior works that employ the Boolean approach incur
substantial latency overheads due to the need to traverse large
homomorphically encrypted databases (e.g., [17, 38]). In contrast, the arithmetic approach achieves a lower memory footprint
after encryption using data packing schemes, but relies on costly
homomorphic operations, such as homomorphic multiplication
and rotation (see §3.1 for more detail). However, the data packing schemes and algorithms used in the arithmetic approach can
be further optimized by using simpler operations (e.g., homomorphic addition) to significantly improve the performance of
secure exact string matching.
Second, a significant portion of the performance overhead
in HE comes from the movement of large homomorphically
encrypted databases, which can be up to 1000× larger than
their unencrypted counterparts [32, 37, 39], across the memory
hierarchy. Several near-data processing approaches [40, 41],
such as (1) processing-near memory (PnM) (e.g., [42–48]), (2)
processing-using memory (PuM) (e.g., [49–52]), (3) in-storage
processing (ISP) (e.g., [53–59]) and (4) in-flash processing (IFP)
(e.g., [60–62]) have been proposed to address the data movement bottleneck between storage and main memory system and
the compute-centric processors or accelerators. While these
solutions aim to utilize high parallelism and high memory bandwidth of the storage and main memory devices, prior secure
string matching techniques [17,27,29,33,34] have limitations in

Homomorphic encryption (HE) allows secure computation
on encrypted data without revealing the original data, providing significant benefits for privacy-sensitive applications. Many
cloud computing applications (e.g., DNA read mapping, biometric matching, web search) use exact string matching as a
key operation. However, prior string matching algorithms that
use homomorphic encryption are limited by high computational
latency caused by the use of complex operations and data movement bottlenecks due to the large encrypted data size. In this
work, we provide an efficient algorithm-hardware codesign to
accelerate HE-based secure exact string matching. We propose
CIPHERMATCH, which (i) reduces the increase in memory
footprint after encryption using an optimized software-based
data packing scheme, (ii) eliminates the use of costly homomorphic operations (e.g., multiplication and rotation), and (iii)
reduces data movement by designing a new in-flash processing
(IFP) architecture.
CIPHERMATCH improves the software-based data packing scheme of an existing HE scheme and performs secure
string matching using only homomorphic addition. This packing method reduces the memory footprint after encryption and
improves the performance of the algorithm. To reduce the data
movement overhead, we design an IFP architecture to accelerate homomorphic addition by leveraging the array-level and bitlevel parallelism of NAND-flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs).
We demonstrate the benefits of CIPHERMATCH using two case
studies: (1) Exact DNA string matching and (2) encrypted
database search. Our pure software-based CIPHERMATCH
implementation that uses our memory-efficient data packing
scheme improves performance and reduces energy consumption
by 42.9× and 17.6×, respectively, compared to the state-ofthe-art software baseline. Integrating CIPHERMATCH with
IFP improves performance and reduces energy consumption
by 136.9× and 256.4×, respectively, compared to the softwarebased CIPHERMATCH implementation.

1. Introduction
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) [1–9] offers a solution to
perform computation directly on encrypted data without the
need for decryption [5, 10, 11]. This capability is essential
for processing large volumes of security-sensitive data (e.g.,
DNA sequences [12–17], biometrics [18, 19], and web application databases [20–23]) in shared computing environments.
Many applications perform exact string matching on securitycritical data, such as DNA string matching [13–17], biometric signature matching [19], and privacy-preserving database
searches [21–23]. However, to perform the string matching
operation in conventional systems (without HE), the data must
be decrypted before computation (or stored in an unencrypted
1

