GUST: Graph Edge-Coloring Utilization for
Accelerating Sparse Matrix Vector Multiplication
Armin Gerami

Bahar Asgari

agerami@umd.edu
Perceptual Interfaces and Reality Laboratory
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA

bahar@umd.edu
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA

Abstract
Sparse matrix-vector multiplication (SpMV) plays a vital role
in various scientific and engineering fields, from scientific
computing to machine learning. Traditional general-purpose
processors often fall short of their peak performance with
sparse data, leading to the development of domain-specific
architectures to enhance SpMV. Yet, these specialized approaches, whether tailored explicitly for SpMV or adapted
from matrix-matrix multiplication accelerators, still face challenges in fully utilizing hardware resources as a result of
sparsity. To tackle this problem, we introduce GUST, a hardware/software co-design, the key insight of which lies in
separating multipliers and adders in the hardware, thereby
enabling resource sharing across multiple rows and columns,
leading to efficient hardware utilization and ameliorating
negative performance impacts from sparsity. Resource sharing, however, can lead to collisions, a problem we address
through a specially devised edge-coloring scheduling algorithm. Our comparisons with various prior domain specific
architectures using real-world datasets shows the effectiveness of GUST, with an average hardware utilization of 33.67%.
We further evaluate GUST by comparing SpMV execution
time and energy consumption of length-256 and -87 GUST
with length-256 1-dimensional systolic array (1D), achieving
an average speedup of 411× and 108×, and energy efficiency
improvement of 137× and 148×, respectively. To asses the
implementation aspect, we compare resource consumption
of GUST with 1D as a baseline through FPGA synthesis.
Length-256 GUST uses the same number of arithmetic units
as length-256 1D, while length-87 GUST uses considerably
less. We also compare GUST with Serpens, a state-of-the-art
FPGA-based SpMV accelerator, with GUST achieving lower

execution time on seven out of nine matrices and lower energy consumption on four.

1 Introduction
Data in the form of sparse matrices is ubiquitous in many scientific and engineering applications, such as electronic structure simulation, graph analysis, computational fluid dynamics, recommendation models, and machine learning. Most of
the problems in these fields, from solving the Schrödinger
equation to calculating the kernel function of a support vector machine, can be solved through sparse matrix-vector
multiplication (SpMV). However, without employing techniques such as sparsity-aware hardware or preprocessing
sparse data to make it hardware-compatible, zero elements
would consume the same amount of processing time as nonzero (NZ) elements, resulting in poor hardware utilization
and high execution time. To clarify, we define hardware utilization as the ratio of average number of arithmetic units
performing NZ operations in each cycle to total number of
arithmetic units.
Prior work have followed approaches such as taking advantage of the high data-reuse rate of 1-dimensional (1D) [22]
and 2-dimensional systolic arrays (2D) [10, 11, 33], efficient
handling of sparse data structures of balanced adder trees
(AT) [1, 3, 9, 25, 27], mapping the hardware to a custom calculational kernel [8, 23, 31], or employing a hardware/software
co-design that involves software-based techniques such as
preprocessing, prefetching, and novel storage formats working in tandem with custom hardware design [2, 8, 12, 16,
21, 29–32, 36] to accelerate sparse matrix multiplication. In
simple terms, all the mentioned work deploy various mechanism to reduce the number of zero elements in the input
stream. Although they successfully do so and improve their
desired performance metric, their hardware utilization is still
far from ideal leaving room for improvement.

