arXiv:2412.15246v1 [cs.CL] 14 Dec 2024

Accelerating Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Derrick Quinn

Mohammad Nouri

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
dq55@cornell.edu

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
mn636@cornell.edu

Neel Patel

John Salihu

Alireza Salemi

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
nmp83@cornell.edu

University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS, USA
jsalihu@ku.edu

University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, USA
asalemi@cs.umass.edu

Sukhan Lee

Hamed Zamani

Mohammad Alian

Samsung Electronics
Hwasung, Republic of Korea
sh1026.lee@samsung.com

University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, USA
zamani@cs.umass.edu

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
malian@cornell.edu

Abstract

Knowledge
source

An evolving solution to address hallucination and enhance
accuracy in large language models (LLMs) is Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG), which involves augmenting LLMs with
information retrieved from an external knowledge source,
such as the web. This paper profiles several RAG execution
pipelines and demystifies the complex interplay between their
retrieval and generation phases. We demonstrate that while
exact retrieval schemes are expensive, they can reduce inference time compared to approximate retrieval variants because
an exact retrieval model can send a smaller but more accurate
list of documents to the generative model while maintaining
the same end-to-end accuracy. This observation motivates
the acceleration of the exact nearest neighbor search for RAG.
In this work, we design Intelligent Knowledge Store (IKS), a
type-2 CXL device that implements a scale-out near-memory
acceleration architecture with a novel cache-coherent interface between the host CPU and near-memory accelerators.
IKS offers 13.4–27.9× faster exact nearest neighbor search
over a 512GB vector database compared with executing the
search on Intel Sapphire Rapids CPUs. This higher search performance translates to 1.7–26.3× lower end-to-end inference
time for representative RAG applications. IKS is inherently
a memory expander; its internal DRAM can be disaggregated
and used for other applications running on the server to prevent DRAM – which is the most expensive component in
today’s servers – from being stranded.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Parallel architectures; Heterogeneous (hybrid) systems; •
Hardware → Hardware accelerators; • Information systems → Database design and models.
Keywords: database acceleration, dense retrieval, retrievalaugmented generation (RAG)

K items
Input

Retrieval
Model

Generative
Model

Output

Fig. 1. Overview of the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art natural language processing systems heavily
rely on large language models (LLMs)–deep Transformer networks [93] with hundreds of millions of parameters. There is
much evidence that information presented in the LLM training corpora is “memorized” in the LLM parameters, forming
a parametric knowledge base that the model depends on for
generating responses. A major challenge with parametric
knowledge is its static nature; it cannot be updated unless the
model undergoes retraining or fine-tuning, which is an extremely costly process. This creates a critical issue, especially
when it comes to non-stationary domains where fresh content
is constantly being produced [108]. Besides, previous studies have indicated that LLMs exhibit limited memorization
for less frequent entities [29], are susceptible to hallucinations [83], and may experience temporal degradation [31].
To overcome the challenges presented by LLMs, a potential
solution is to enhance them with non-parametric knowledge,
where the LLM is augmented with information retrieved from
a knowledge source (e.g., text documents). These approaches
have recently gained considerable attention in the machine
learning communities [22; 26; 41; 49; 58; 73; 83], and have
played key roles in some recent breakthrough applications in
the tech industry, such as Google Gemini [90], Microsoft Copilot [86], and OpenAI ChatGPT with Retrieval Plugins [56].
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is the term that is

Accepted for publication at ASPLOS 2025

