Orion: A Fully Homomorphic Encryption
Framework for Deep Learning
Austin Ebel∗

New York University
Brooklyn, NY, USA
abe5240@nyu.edu

Karthik Garimella∗

New York University
Brooklyn, NY, USA
bjr5@nyu.edu

CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Cryptography;
• Software and its engineering → Compilers.

Abstract

arXiv:2311.03470v3 [cs.CR] 12 Feb 2025

Brandon Reagen

New York University
Brooklyn, NY, USA
kg2383@nyu.edu

Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) has the potential to
substantially improve privacy and security by enabling computation directly on encrypted data. This is especially true
with deep learning, as today, many popular user services
are powered by neural networks in the cloud. Beyond its
well-known high computational costs, one of the major challenges facing wide-scale deployment of FHE-secured neural
inference is effectively mapping these networks to FHE primitives. FHE poses many programming challenges including
packing large vectors, managing accumulated noise, and
translating arbitrary and general-purpose programs to the
limited instruction set provided by FHE. These challenges
make building large FHE neural networks intractable using
the tools available today.
In this paper we address these challenges with Orion, a
fully-automated framework for private neural inference using FHE. Orion accepts deep neural networks written in
PyTorch and translates them into efficient FHE programs.
We achieve this by proposing a novel single-shot multiplexed
packing strategy for arbitrary convolutions and through a
new, efficient technique to automate bootstrap placement
and scale management. We evaluate Orion on common benchmarks used by the FHE deep learning community and outperform state-of-the-art by 2.38× on ResNet-20, the largest
network they report. Orion’s techniques enable processing
much deeper and larger networks. We demonstrate this by
evaluating ResNet-50 on ImageNet and present the first highresolution FHE object detection experiments using a YOLOv1 model with 139 million parameters. Orion is open-source
for all to use at: https://github.com/baahl-nyu/orion.

Keywords: fully homomorphic encryption, compilers, cryptography, privacy-preserving machine learning
ACM Reference Format:
Austin Ebel∗ , Karthik Garimella∗ , and Brandon Reagen. 2025. Orion:
A Fully Homomorphic Encryption Framework for Deep Learning.
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3676641.3716008

1

Introduction

Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) is a powerful encryption scheme that allows for computation to be performed
directly on encrypted data without ever needing to decrypt.
In this manner, both the original data and any intermediate
results remain encrypted and can only be observed in the
clear when the data owner decrypts it locally using their secret key. FHE provides a solution to the security and privacy
concerns of outsourced cloud computation. This has broad
implications for areas such as finance or health and other situations involving sensitive data. Many of these services are
now driven by deep learning, specifically neural networks.
Today, the wide-scale deployment of FHE-enabled private
deep learning remains limited due to the significant computational costs of FHE and the programming challenges of
translating standard, unencrypted neural networks into FHE
programs. While hardware accelerators have addressed this
performance gap [24, 27, 44, 45, 61, 63, 66] and FHE compilers have made progress in translating workloads into FHE
programs [19, 21, 22, 46, 56, 69], it remains a challenge to
run FHE neural inference on large datasets in a high-level
deep learning framework (e.g., ImageNet inference in PyTorch). This paper focuses on efficiently and automatically
mapping neural networks, as implemented in modern deep
learning libraries, to FHE programs. Besides the computational costs, multiple compounding factors make effectively
mapping neural networks to FHE challenging.
Vector packing: The CKKS FHE scheme [15, 16] encrypts
large vectors that typically vary in length from 214 to 217 ,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/2025/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716008

∗ Equal contribution.

1

B Austin Ebel is the corresponding author.

