DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning
Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments
Rohan Basu Roy

Vijay Gadepally

Devesh Tiwari

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Lexington, MA, USA

Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA

arXiv:2509.25090v1 [cs.PF] 29 Sep 2025

Abstract
This work introduces a new subarea of performance tuning
– performance tuning in a shared interference-prone computing environment. We demonstrate that existing tuners are
significantly suboptimal by design because of their inability to account for interference during tuning. Our solution,
DarwinGame, employs a tournament-based design to systematically compare application executions with different tunable
parameter configurations, enabling it to identify the relative
performance of different tunable parameter configurations in
a noisy environment. Compared to existing solutions, DarwinGame achieves more than 27% reduction in execution time,
with less than 0.5% performance variability. DarwinGame is
the first performance tuner that will help developers tune their
applications in shared, interference-prone, cloud environments.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing.
Keywords: Performance Tuning, Performance Interference,
Tuning in Cloud
ACM Reference Format:
Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari. 2025. DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy
Cloud Environments. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1

Introduction

Background. Tuning application-level and system-level configurable parameters to minimize application execution time,
has been long-studied and is widely accepted to be a challenging problem [11, 17, 31, 45, 46, 62, 73, 74, 76]. This is
because an application performance tuning requires navigating through a vast and often non-linear search space
of many application-level and system-level configurable
parameters. These tuning parameters interact with each
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

other, making the tuning process challenging and timeconsuming [54, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 82].
In response to this challenge, researchers and practitioners have innovated many performance tuners [11, 12, 14, 22,
53, 81, 85, 86]. However, all prior tuners implicitly assume
that the tuning process is performed in a dedicated computing environment without performance interference from
co-located applications. Unfortunately, users are increasingly
running their applications in shared environments including cloud computing platforms due to a variety of reasons
(briefly outlined below), and the inability to account for interference during tuning makes existing tuners suboptimal
(reasons briefly outlined below and quantified in Sec. 5).
Increasing needs and challenges of performance tuning in shared, interference-prone execution environments. The cloud computing platforms have experienced
dramatic adoption in the last decade [30, 79, 80]. Even when
organizations use on-premise clusters, possibly as a supplement to cloud computing, resources are often shared among
users to save operational costs, promote more efficient usage
of resources, and reduce queue wait time [1, 3, 4, 25, 70, 83].
There are various other reasons why application developers may increasingly use production cloud platforms to tune
their applications’ performance. For example, certain computing resources (e.g., a specific chip or AI accelerator) may
only be available on cloud computing platforms [61]. Production cloud provides a diverse range of resources and computing environments, that are available on-demand, avoiding
the need for significant upfront investments in dedicated
on-premise clusters [18, 29]. The end user may not be able to
afford dedicated on-premise resources and rather use pay-asyou-go renting of shared resources (on the cloud computing
platform) [9, 67]. Additionally, the application may be intended to be deployed on a cloud computing ecosystem and
hence, should be developed and performance-tuned on the
same platform type to ensure a particular configuration’s
sensitivity to interference is captured during tuning [42, 50].
Therefore, we need tuners that can be effective when applications are executed on interference-prone environments.
One intuitive solution is to use existing tuners in the
shared cloud environment and rely on its outcome. While
simple, our experiments reveal that existing tuners are significantly suboptimal (more than 40% far from optimal) when
used in shared, interference-prone execution environments
(Sec. 5). This is expected because existing tuners are not

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

aware of and are designed to account for the impact of interference in a shared execution environment – e.g., an effective
tuning configuration may be at a serious disadvantage if the
interference is particularly high during its evaluation.
Unfortunately, designing tuners in a shared cloud environment is particularly challenging because the effect of performance interference from co-located applications cannot be actively controlled or manipulated in a production cloud-based
execution environment. Furthermore, the level of performance
inference or noise on such platforms varies significantly,
making it difficult to accurately assess the true effectiveness
of a particular tuning configuration. One naive solution is to
rent dedicated computing infrastructure on the cloud just for
tuning purposes – but, they are often prohibitively expensive [88], the tuning process may last weeks/months [14], and
determining a configuration without interference-awareness
may lead to tuning configuration that is sensitive to noise
and exhibit high-performance variation in a shared cloud
setting (as shown in Sec. 2). Therefore, the goal of this work
is to design and implement a tuner that works effectively and
efficiently in shared, interference-prone environments.
The following are the contributions of DarwinGame.
Introduction of a new research area and first-solution.
Currently, application developers do not have access to
any capability that can perform performance tuning in an
interference-prone cloud-based environment. DarwinGame
is the first solution to address this challenge.
Novel tournament-based tuning in a shared execution
environment. DarwinGame bypasses the inability to manipulate or control the performance interference on shared
cloud computing hardware, by co-locating multiple copies
of the same application with different parameter tuning configurations to approximately assess the relative potential of
different parameter configurations with respect to each other,
and their sensitivity to background interference (referred
to as “playing games”). However, as Sec. 3 demonstrates,
these co-located “games” need to be organized and played
systematically to pick a winner. DarwinGame employs a
multi-phase tournament strategy where each phase is played
in multiple rounds and with different styles (e.g., Swiss, double elimination, and barrage) to progress toward finding the
most promising tuning configuration ( Sec. 3).
Evaluation. Our extensive evaluation (including on the
AWS platform, using Redis, GROMACS, FFmpeg, and
LAMMPS [7, 19, 75, 78]) demonstrates DarwinGame’s effectiveness and its complementary nature to existing tuners.
DarwinGame reduces the execution time of applications
by more than 27% compared to other existing solutions –
while limiting the performance variation to less than 0.5%.
It can be integrated with existing tuners to improve their
effectiveness by more than 15%. DarwinGame is available at:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14014918.

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari

2

Background and Motivation

Terms and Definitions. In the context of application tuning, tunable parameters are application- and systems-level
parameters that can be configured to take on multiple values
or states. These configurable parameters form the application’s tuning search space (or search space for short), whose
dimension is equal to the number of tunable parameters.
The size of the search space is the number of possible combinations of configurations of the tunable parameters. For
example, if the search space is 𝑛−dimensional, and the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ
parameter can have 𝑎𝑖 number ofÎ
possible values, then the
size of the tuning search space is 𝑛𝑖=1 𝑎𝑖 .
A tuning configuration refers to one point in the tuning
search space (a configuration has one specific value for each
possible parameter). The execution time of an application
depends on the chosen configuration. Executing and measuring the execution time of an application with a given
configuration is called sampling.
Application tuners sample different tuning configurations
to find the configuration with the least execution time. The
optimal configuration in a dedicated computing environment, simply referred to as optimal configuration (or optimal),
is the best tuning configuration, i.e., the one with the minimum execution time in an interference-free environment (e.g.,
an on-premise cluster with dedicated nodes). Accurately determining the optimal configuration requires sampling all the
points of the search space, one by one, in a dedicated environment (not in shared hardware or a performance interferenceprone cloud-based execution environment). Determining the
optimal configuration is often not feasible in practice, but we
performed extensive experiments in dedicated-non-shared
environments to determine the optimal configuration for
understanding the effectiveness of DarwinGame.
We define the strategy of sampling all the points in the
search space in a shared, cloud-based VM (noisy environment),
one by one, as the exhaustive search. Note that the exhaustive
search process may not yield the same answer as the optimal
configuration because the exhaustive search is performed in an
interference-prone cloud-based execution environment. We use
an exhaustive search strategy as a comparison point because
if a programmer has access to only a cloud-based execution
environment, this is the only feasible brute-force method to
find an effective tuning configuration.
The goal of an effective tuner is to determine the optimal
configuration (a tuning configuration with the least execution time in the non-shared environment) without performing an exhaustive search in the cloud environment – to save
both time and money. In addition to this, the application
tuner should pick a tuning configuration that experiences
low-performance variations across different runs (less performance sensitivity to noise or interference). In other words,
in a cloud-based environment, DarwinGame needs to find a
tuning configuration that results in minimum execution time

75

Configuration C

50

Configuration B

25
Configuration A

0
200

400
600
800
Execution Time with Different
Tuning Configurations (s)

100

Configurations

A

B

C

75
50
25
0
200

400
600
800
Execution Time with Tuning
Configuration A, B, or C (s)

Figure 1. Different tuning configurations result in significantly
different execution times (Redis serving one million requests on
AWS general purpose m5 VM). Due to the interference-prone
execution environment in the cloud, application execution with
any given tuning configuration exhibits variation in execution
time across different runs.
(possibly, as low as the optimal configuration in a non-shared
environment) and low sensitivity to interference.
Motivation. As expected, the size of the tuning search space
can be large. For example, the size of the search space of Redis with application- and systems-level parameters is 7.8
million (details of parameters and execution in Sec. 4). Fig. 1
(left) shows the cumulative distribution of execution times
for serving one million requests on Redis using 250 randomly
chosen tuning configurations. Different tuning configurations result in significantly different execution times – the
range of execution time varies from 230 seconds to 792 seconds. More than 93% of the tuning configurations result in
twice the execution time compared to an execution with the
tuning configuration resulting in the least execution time.
The problem becomes even more challenging because the
execution time of an application with a particular chosen
tuning configuration varies in a cloud-based execution environment, due to external interference and noise in the shared
environment. From Fig. 1 (right), we observe that when an
application is executed 1000 times in the cloud using each
of the three chosen tuning configurations (A, B, and C, with
average execution time 440s, 617s, and 678s, respectively),
their execution time can vary even by 45%, due to differences
in the interference level and varying resource contention
from other co-located applications. In other words, the true
potential of a tuning configuration cannot be determined
without running a prohibitively large number of times.
Takeaway I. As expected, different tuning configurations for any given application yield very different execution times (more than 3× differences). Unfortunately, due
to noise and interference, determining the optimal tuning
configuration (the least execution time) in a cloud-based
environment is challenging because even the same tuning configuration may exhibit more than 40% variations
across multiple runs.
To further elaborate on this point, in Fig. 2, we show a scatter plot of the coefficient of variation of the execution time

Mean Execution Time
with Different Tuning
Configurations (s)

100

% of Executions with Tuning
Configuration A, B, or C

% of Tuning Configurations

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

800

600

400

200

0

3

6
9
12
Coefficient of Variation of Execution Time (%)

15

Figure 2. Different tuning configurations exhibit different degrees of performance variation across runs. Achieving only
low execution time via tuning is not sufficient. Both lowperformance variation and low-execution time are desired –
for example, configurations denoted by blue markers (Redis
serving one million requests on AWS general purpose m5 VM).
of 250 randomly selected tuning configurations (1000 runs
with each configuration in the cloud) on the x-axis and the
mean execution time on the y-axis. We note that tuning configurations yield significantly different performance in the
cloud due to interference. Also, the performance variation
affects the configurations differently, i.e., the coefficient of
variation is different for the different tuning configurations.
Particularly, we note that there is a trend of application
execution using better-performing tuning configurations
(lower execution time), to have a higher coefficient of variation than application execution using tuning configurations
resulting in higher execution time. This is because, when an
application is highly optimized, it is likely that the execution
is pushing the system closer to its resource limits or is more
sensitive to specific resources. Hence, even small fluctuations
in resource availability can cause significant variations in
performance. Since after tuning, these applications will be
executed in a shared cloud environment, the tuner should
find tuning configurations that result in relatively stable
performance (less coefficient of variation in execution time).
However, there are still some tuning configurations
(shown in blue in Fig. 2), which have a low coefficient of
variation in execution time and also significantly low mean
execution time. These tuning configurations are good candidates for selection by the application tuner. They present
an opportunity for a high-performant (low execution time)
and stable (low variation in performance) application execution. Since such tuning configurations are less in number, it
is challenging for a tuner to find them. We observe similar
behavior in terms of mean execution time and performance
variation of different tuning configurations for all the evaluated applications (details in Sec. 5).
Takeaway II. The interference-prone and noisy cloud
execution environment affects tuning configurations differently – application executions with certain tuning
configurations experience more performance variations
than others. A desirable performance tuner should find
tuning configurations with low execution time and lowperformance variations under interference.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari

because the application execution time with a tuning configuration changes with a change in the interference level in the
cloud at different time intervals when tuning is performed.

ActiveHarmony
OpenTuner
BLISS
Exhaustive Search
Optimal

Takeaway III. Existing state-of-the-art performance
tuners, when used as-is, are ineffective in a cloud-based
environment because their design is fundamentally
unaware of the interference experienced in a cloudbased environment and its effect on various tuning
configurations – resulting in producing significantly
suboptimal tuning configurations.

0

140
280
420 0
140
280
420 0
140
280
420
Execution Time when
Execution Time when
Execution Time when
Optimized at Time T1 (s)
Optimized at Time T2 (s)
Optimized at Time T3 (s)

Figure 3. Due to interference posed by the noisy tenants in the
cloud, state-of-the-art tuners perform sub-optimally and cannot determine the configuration with the least execution time.
Further, their selected tuning configuration is inconsistent – it
changes over time, depending upon the time of the tuning and
corresponding interference (Redis serving one million requests
on AWS general purpose m5 VM).
State-of-the-art performance tuners focus on tuning applications and executing them in a dedicated environment
to reduce execution time. They do not consider performance
variation in the cloud during tuning and execution, and interference from noisy neighbors. Therefore, naively using
existing state-of-the-art performance tuners in a cloud-based
environment yields tuning configurations (as their outcome)
that are far from the optimal configuration obtained in a
non-shared environment.
Fig. 3 shows that the execution time of the optimized configuration obtained by performing tuning in the cloud using
existing tuners as-is (OpenTuner [11], ActiveHarmony [45],
and BLISS [62]). These solutions perform tuning and application execution in a cloud-based noisy environment. The
execution times are much higher than the optimal configuration obtained in a dedicated, interference-free environment. We noted that, while not shown in Fig. 3, performing
tuning in a dedicated, interference-free environment using
existing tuners as-is, indeed results in execution times very
close to the optimal configuration obtained in a dedicated,
interference-free environment – highlighting that existing
tuners become ineffective purely because of uncontrollable
and unregulated interference in the cloud-based execution
environments. The interference in the cloud changes between the executions of an application with different tuning
configurations, which leads the existing tuners to misinterpret the relative performance of different configurations.
One may suspect that exhaustively searching all tuning
configurations in the cloud may be more effective (Exhaustive Search). While reasonable, even exhaustive search results in a significantly higher execution time than the optimal
configuration’s execution time. As expected, this is because
of the effect of varying degrees of interference on different
tuning configurations.
Furthermore, Fig. 3 also demonstrates that when tuning
is performed multiple times in the cloud during different
time intervals, the application tuners select different configurations and as a result, the relative effectiveness of the
tuners varies among multiple rounds of tuning. This happens

Motivated by these takeaways, next, we propose the design of DarwinGame.

3

Design of DarwinGame

In this section, we first set the goal of DarwinGame and
discuss the overview of the design.
3.1

Design Goal

DarwinGame’s design goal is to find tuning configurations
that result in (a) low execution time and (b) low variations in
performance during execution in a cloud-based environment,
and (c) the low tuning time as tuning time contributes toward
application development time and cost.
In production-shared cloud environments, the level of interference from other tenants can not be deterministically
controlled or configured by the end user and hence, its impact on the evaluation of a particular tuning configuration
cannot be assessed. To bypass this, DarwinGame employs the
co-location of multiple copies of the same application with different tuning configurations, on the same node(s) to determine
their relative potential. In the context of DarwinGame, this
is referred to as playing games (co-located execution of an
application with different tuning configurations) between
different players (different tuning configurations).
The key insight is that instead of attempting to accurately
measure the true execution time (when no interference is
present) of each tuning configuration, DarwinGame attempts
to get approximate relative ranking and possibly, improve
this approximation by trying multiple times/games among
promising tuning configurations.
DarwinGame plays a tournament of multiple games in
multiple phases to judge the relative performance of goodperforming configurations multiple times, with multiple opponent tuning configurations, before deciding on the most
desirable tuning configuration. Playing a tournament of multiple games helps DarwinGame to accurately judge the relative performance of different tuning configurations, even
when the interference level varies. However, the tournament
structure needs to be carefully designed to ensure that DarwinGame achieves its tuning goals and finds configurations
with the desirable properties (design goals (a), (b), & (c)).

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments

Main Bracket

Consistency Score
Execution Score

Final
Loser Bracket
Regional Phase
(Swiss Style)

Global Phase
(Double Elimination
Style)

Playoffs
(Barrage Style)
All configurations in a phase
Winner configurations

Figure 4. Overview of DarwinGame’s tournament-based tuning: multiple phases and different playing styles.

3.2

Design Overview

Game formats of DarwinGame’s tournament. DarwinGame’s tournament-based design is based on three major
formats of playing games: Swiss, double elimination, and
barrage. In the Swiss format [47], players compete across
several rounds and are paired against others with similar
performance scores, allowing for a ranking-based progression. The double elimination format [32] offers participants a
second chance by moving them to a loser bracket if they lose
once; they face elimination only after a second loss, ensuring
fair opportunities for recovery. The barrage style [5] is used
toward the final stages, where the best-performing players
from previous rounds compete in a series of direct knockouts.
This format also allows participants a brief opportunity to
recover if they lose early and ensures that only the strongest
tuning configurations progress to the final round.
Tournament structure. As visually depicted in Fig. 4, DarwinGame structures the tournament to select application
tuning configuration in four phases (each phase can have
multiple rounds and each phase has a different playing style
– that is, how configurations compete against each other and
how they advance).
In the first phase, DarwinGame divides the entire parameter search space into different regions and plays the regional
phase in a Swiss tournament style [47]. In this tournament
style, the most promising players directly compete with each
other and are given chances to progress further. This tournament style is chosen for this phase because the Swiss tournament style is most suited for identifying players (application
execution with best-performing tuning configurations) with
the highest potential among a large pool of players (the first
phase has the largest number of players). Sec. 3.3 describes
more design trade-offs and how DarwinGame navigates to
ensure that if some regions have more potential, then more
winners are selected from them. The winners from each
region then proceed to the global phase.
In the global phase, the tournament is played in a double
elimination style [32] – so that the losing tuning configurations get an additional opportunity to remain in the tournament without being directly eliminated – because these

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

configurations have proven their worth in the past and DarwinGame attempts to avoid sudden elimination due to “one
bad day (high interference sensitivity)”.
In the global phase, tuning configurations are judged based
on their execution time and variations in performance. This is
done to determine tuning configurations that are consistent
in performance and do not exhibit significant performance
sensitivity to the noise/interference in a cloud-based execution environment. The winners of the global phase, along
with the winner among all the losing configurations of the
global phase, proceed to the playoffs phase which is played
in the barrage style [5]. The top two tuning configurations
from the playoffs play in the final to determine the winner.
In each game of the tournament, DarwinGame co-locates
multiple copies of the same application with different tuning
configurations and runs them in parallel to identify their
relative performance and variability in the presence of noise.
Empirically, we observed this approach outperforms other
strategies where each configuration is individually exposed
to the background noise or controlled interference tests (often by more than 10%). This improvement arises from DarwinGame’s ability to expose all competing tuning configurations to identical noise conditions, allowing for fair and
consistent comparison. This form of comparison is required
due to the unpredictable nature of cloud environments and
the inability to control the background noise.
When performing performance tuning in shared environments, fluctuating background interference makes it difficult
to compare application execution with different parameter
configurations accurately over time. Methods like Bayesian
optimization, which rely on proximity-based variance estimates, become less effective when nearby samples face
different noise levels. Similarly, statistical methods like quantile regression and Thompson sampling, which are often
used to handle variability, are also unable to account for
unpredictable cloud interference (resulting in significantly
less effective results compared to DarwinGame). By simultaneously evaluating multiple configurations under the same
conditions, DarwinGame’s tournament structure effectively
adapts to interference, ensuring that comparisons are fair
and reflective of real-world cloud environments. This approach reduces bias from noise induced fluctuations and
systematically narrows down the best-performing configurations, making it more robust than traditional optimization
techniques in noisy, shared environments.
We also highlight that unpredictable background interference also makes it challenging to provide any provable theoretical bounds for DarwinGame. This is why DarwinGame
is, on purpose, designed to be driven by intuitive choices,
instead of claiming any theoretical bounds about its efficacy.
We remark that the theoretical underpinning of tournament
design is widely regarded as a difficult problem in multiple communities [35, 44, 58, 64] – especially in terms of

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari
Regiona

> Work Done Deviation %
C
Config. B
Configuration A

Execution Score of a
configuration
=
Work done by a configuration
Work done by configuration A

New

Regiona

New

New

Regiona

Best

New

Regiona

Best
Winner within
Regiona

% of work done
Early Termination

Round 1

Round 2

Round 3

Regionb

Played in parallel
Regionb

Regionb

Figure 5. DarwinGame performs early termination in the
initial phases of the tournament to reduce tuning time (Configuration A has the highest execution score).
providing any proven theoretical bounds because of the uncertainty and variance-related challenges. As expected, prior
studies largely focus on analytical trade-offs between fairness, complexity, incentive, etc., and often ultimately rely
on probability-driven computer simulations under various
simplistic assumptions [26] instead of hard provable bounds.
DarwinGame’s strategies for reducing tuning time. Recall from Sec. 3.1 that one of the design goals of DarwinGame
is to reduce the tuning time. To achieve this, DarwinGame
makes several adjustments in the structure of the games
played in the tournament – (1) in the initial rounds of the
tournament, multiple players (more than just two) can play
together. (2) The games allow early termination, which means
that when a player is performing significantly well compared
to the other players, the game gets terminated and the winner is declared. DarwinGame keeps track of the amount of
work being completed by each of the players while they are
competing together in a game.
Now, when DarwinGame observes that the difference in
the work done between the fastest and the next best player
is more than the work done deviation percentage (𝑑), DarwinGame terminates the game and declares the winner even
before the players have finished execution (Fig. 5). (Sec. 4
discusses the methodology to determine the amount of work
done). We set the value of 𝑑 to be 10%. However, we observe
less than 2.7% difference in DarwinGame’s execution-timewise outcome when 𝑑 is varied between 5% to 15%. DarwinGame allows early termination when at least 25% of the
total work done is completed by the fastest configuration.
(3) Also, DarwinGame makes arrangements to play multiple
games in parallel within a phase. Next, we will discuss the
details of the regional phase.
3.3

Phase I : Regional Phase of DarwinGame

The entire search space size can be in the range of millions. To
tackle such a large number of players (tuning configurations),
DarwinGame divides the entire search into 𝑛𝑟 number of
different regions. In our experiments, we set 𝑛𝑟 to be 10,000.
However, DarwinGame’s execution time-wise result varies
by less than 3.7%, when 𝑛𝑟 is varied between 5000 to 15,000
across all evaluated applications. All the points from the
𝑛-dimensional search space of an application are mapped

Players
selected for
current round
Early
Termination

New

New

Round 1

New

Execution
Score

Best

Round 2

Winners within
Regionb

Figure 6. The regional phase is played in a Swiss style to
quickly identify the tuning configuration(s) with the highest
potential. White circles denote configurations that are not yet
selected to play within any round. A darker shade of a configuration (which has played in a particular round) denotes better
performance. A white star inside a circle denotes the winner
configuration(s) of a round.
to a one-dimensional index. Based on the index values, the
tuning configurations corresponding to the different points
are assigned to different regions, so that all regions contain
an equal number of tuning configurations.
Inside each region, the number of players that play a game
together is simply chosen equal to be number of cores (𝑃), but
is configurable. Making multiple players compete together
helps to reduce the tuning time compared to playing more
games with only two players. Note that, DarwinGame cannot play a game between all the players to decide the winner
as the number of tuning configurations is in the range of
millions and all of them can not be co-located in a node. Even
when we play games multiple times between the maximum
number of most promising tuning configurations that can
be co-located (1000 configurations), the resulting winner is
far from the optimal solution (more than 2.8× more execution time on average). This is because co-location inside a
VM creates additional noise, impacting the performance of
promising tuning configurations.
Games in different regions can be played in parallel in
different VMs to reduce tuning time. Within each region,
the games are played for multiple rounds in a Swiss style. In
a Swiss-style tournament, the increasingly most promising
players compete with each other. This form of tournament
helps to eliminate low-potential players quickly and identify
the most promising ones. Since the goal of DarwinGame in
this initial phase of the tournament is to quickly identify the
most potent tuning configurations in a large search space,
it adopts a Swiss playing style. Also, all the games in this
round allow for early termination to save tuning time. The

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments

g ni k n a R e si w
- e r o c S n oi t u c e x E

1
2
3
4
Round 1 Round 2 Round 3

Main Bracket

Consistency Score of
=
1
1
1
+
+
2
1
4

relative performance of each tuning configuration in a game
is determined via the execution score. It is the fraction of
work done in a game by an application execution with a
tuning configuration compared to execution with the fastest
tuning configuration, until the game is completed (the fastest
execution completes) or is terminated early (Fig. 5).
In the first round within a region, players are selected
randomly to play a game, and thereafter, assigned an execution score. From the next rounds, half of the players are
selected from the player pool that has never been selected to
play a game (new players; no assigned execution score), and
the other half is chosen from players with assigned execution
scores (best players from the ones that have played a game before). This selection is performed probabilistically – a higher
execution score means more probability of being selected to
play a game. Thus, players with high scores contend with
each other, making the tournament progress in Swiss style
(easier to figure out the best-performing players among a
large group of players).
Within each region, if DarwinGame observes that one
player is consistently winning for more than one time, it
terminates the regional stage and declares the winner. It
proceeds the players within the deviation 𝑑% (work done deviation percentage) of the best-performing player in terms of
the execution score to the global phase. This is done to make
sure that promising players getting negatively impacted by
contention from others are still given a chance to proceed in
the tournament. If the termination condition of the regional
phase is not met, DarwinGame continue the rounds of games
in each region till each player receives an equal probability
of being selected to play at least one game. This termination
criterion speeds up the tuning time. The number of rounds
played depends on how competitive the players in a region
are. When some players are significantly more competitive
than others in a region, the winners are determined in a
lesser number of rounds.
Fig. 6 describes the progress in the regional phase in two
different regions. The rounds inside the regions progress
with the selection of half of the players based on their execution score (shaded circles), and the other half from the
players that have not played a game yet (white circles). As the
fastest configuration (circle with a white star) consistently
wins rounds more than once, DarwinGame terminates the
regional phase and declares the winner. Also, if there are
other players, consistently performing within the work done

Main Bracket

Main Bracket
To Playoffs

Loser Bracket

3

Figure 7. A high consistency score denotes low-performance
variations of tuning configurations with high execution scores.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Round 1
Consistency Score

Loser Bracket

Loser Bracket

Round 2

Round 3

Execution Score

Figure 8. The global phase is played in a double elimination
style to prevent losing tuning configurations from being immediately eliminated.
deviation percentage of the fastest configuration, then they
are also declared as the winner, and they proceed to the
global phase. If a region has more promising candidates (on
average, some regions can be more promising than others),
DarwinGame’s design ensures it can have multiple winners
that advance to the next round. Next, we discuss the global
phase of DarwinGame.
3.4

Phase II : Global Phase of DarwinGame

This phase of the tournament is played in a double elimination style. The phase has two different game brackets –
the main bracket and the loser bracket. In this tournament
format, the losers of games are not eliminated immediately.
They are transferred to the loser bracket and get an additional chance to proceed in the game. When multiple application executions with different tuning configurations are
co-located, certain promising tuning configurations can be
negatively impacted to a greater extent by the presence of
other executions in the same execution environment. Thus,
the double elimination format gives them an additional opportunity to win and proceed in the tournament. The tuning
configurations that proceed to the global phase from the regional phase are already promising choices in terms of their
execution time. Hence, in this round, they are additionally
judged based on the consistency of the performance in the
presence of other application executions and background
noise in a cloud-based platform.
When a fixed number of players (𝑃) play a game together,
we define the consistency score of a player as the average
of 1/ranking of the player in terms of the execution score
from the current and also all the previous games (Fig. 7).
This captures the consistency of performance of a tuning
configuration over the different games it has played – a
higher consistency score means lower variations in performance of configurations with high execution scores, in a
noisy cloud-based environment. After the termination of
each game, players are ranked based on their execution score
and consistency score. Thereafter, the players are ranked
based on the summation of execution score ranking and consistency score ranking. The one with the lowest summation
value is declared as the winner.
As shown in Fig. 8, The global phase also consists of multiple rounds of games, where winners from the previous round

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

3.5

Phases III & IV: Playoffs and Final Phase

From the global phase, only promising players, in terms of
both execution time and performance consistency, proceed
to playoffs. To ensure high accuracy in determining the winner tuning configurations, in the playoffs and in the final,
the games are played among two players only at a time (the
number of co-location is two), and DarwinGame does not
perform early termination (the games are played till the completion of an application execution with the faster among the
two competing tuning configurations). This is because the
near-winner configurations are not likely to have significant
differences in their execution time.
The playoff is played in a barrage style, which is a common
way to perform the penultimate round of the tournament,
as it is a robust form of playing style to ensure only the
top contenders proceed to the finals [2]. Among the players
of the playoffs, the top half of the players with the highest
average execution score play with each other. The winners
of these games proceed to the next round, while the losers
play with the winners of the games between the bottom half
of the players in the playoffs, in terms of execution score. For
example, if there are four players in the playoffs, the top two
players with the highest average execution score play the
first game of the playoffs. The winner, in terms of execution

e mi T n oi t u c e x E

proceed to the next round. Within each round, players form
groups of 𝑃 number of players, and the games among different groups within a round can be played in parallel. When
forming these groups of players within a round, DarwinGame
ensures that the players within each group initially belonged
to different regions of the search space to improve diversity
within each playing group. The winners from each group,
within each round, proceed to the next round and stay in the
main bracket of games, while all the other players (losers)
are transferred to the loser bracket. As the number of rounds
progresses, the main bracket size starts decreasing while the
loser bracket size starts increasing. The number of rounds
continues till the main bracket has only a chosen number
of players (we set this number to be three; DarwinGame’s
chosen tuning configuration that wins the final remains the
same even if we increase this chosen number of players beyond three). These players proceed to the next round, the
playoffs. All games within the global phase also follow early
termination to reduce the tuning time.
Thereafter, among all the players of the loser bracket, 𝑃
number of players are selected based on their average execution score and consistency score, seen so far. The winner of
this game among the players of the loser bracket, receives a
wild card entry to proceed to the playoffs. Playing additional
games in the loser bracket does not result in improvement
of DarwinGame’s tuning, but increases the tuning time. The
tournament structure ensures that all the tuning configurations that proceed to the playoffs have low execution time
and variations in performance in the cloud.

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari
SubspaceB

SubspaceA

SubspaceC

Tuning configurations
Existing tuner's optimization

A
B
C
Complete search space

Winning configuration in subspace
DarwinGame inside subspace

Figure 9. DarwinGame can be integrated with existing application tuners by playing tournaments inside subspaces.
score, directly goes to the final. Since all the players in the
playoffs have low variations in performance, they are judged
based on their execution time. The second game is played
between the remaining two players of the playoffs. The loser
of this game gets eliminated. Thereafter, the winner of the
second game and the loser of the first game plays the third
game of the playoffs. The winner of the third game becomes
the second finalist of DarwinGame.
The two finalists play the final game of DarwinGame. The
application execution with the tuning configuration that
finishes earlier among the two competing tuning configurations, is the winning tuning configuration. The tournament
structure of DarwinGame is designed to find tuning configurations that lead to low execution time and low variations
in performance. DarwinGame can also be integrated with
existing tuners to improve their effectiveness.
As noted earlier, DarwinGame is designed to be driven by
intuitive choices around playing tournaments; therefore, we
purposely avoid claiming theoretical bounds. Nevertheless,
DarwinGame’s design provides flexibility to finish certain
rounds within a reasonable number of trials, ensuring efficient convergence. For example, the Swiss-style tournament
is expected to converge logarithmically in terms of the the
number of rounds – though the exact rounds required can
vary based on factors like relative player rankings, sensitivity to background noise, and player performance variability.
Similarly, the global phase’s convergence depends on the distribution of consistency scores, which, in turn, reflects the
competing players’ resilience to interference across rounds.
While we do not necessarily force DarwinGame to finish in
a specified number of rounds, it can be adjusted to achieve
specific properties, if desired. Finally, phases III and IV (playoffs and final phase) are configured to converge in a linear
number of trials since configurations compete in a straightforward knock-out fashion.
3.6

Enhancing existing tuners with DarwinGame

DarwinGame is designed in a way such that it is amenable to
be integrated with other existing tuning solutions to improve

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments

their effectiveness of tuning in the cloud, reduce the tuning
time, and determine tuning configurations that have low
variations in performance in the cloud.
As visually depicted in Fig. 9, this integration is performed
by dividing the entire search space into different subspaces.
The existing tuner observes each subspace as a single tuning configuration, using its optimization logic to traverse
from one subspace to another. Inside every subspace, DarwinGame plays a full tournament by dividing the subspace
into multiple regions, proceeding through the regional phase,
followed by the global phase, playoffs, and the final.
This modular approach allows DarwinGame to operate
within each subspace independently, identifying optimal configurations without disrupting the existing tuner’s broader
search process. The performance of the winning configuration within a subspace is then used to represent the performance of that subspace, helping the existing tuner make
more informed decisions. Sec. 5 demonstrates that the integration of DarwinGame with existing tuners enhances the
tuning effectiveness and reduces both tuning time and the
resources required to perform tuning.
Integrating DarwinGame with existing tuners enhances
optimization without requiring changes to the pipelines of
systems and applications already using those tuners. Its modular design makes integration relatively easier and reduces
tuning time in cloud environments. This results in more consistent performance assessments, making DarwinGame an
effective enhancement to existing frameworks.
Putting it all together: As summarized in Algorithm 1,
DarwinGame employs a multi-phase tournament structure
to optimize application tuning in noisy cloud environments.
It begins with regional Swiss-style tournaments to quickly
identify top configurations, progresses to a double elimination global phase to ensure consistency under interference,
and concludes with barrage-style playoffs and a final to accurately determine the best tuning configuration. Co-locating
application executions with different tuning configurations
across multiple games allow DarwinGame to accurately assess and rank configurations under noisy conditions. DarwinGame’s evaluation across games of the tournament preserves the mathematical basis of fitness measures while improving its robustness in tuning by revealing consistency
across progressively challenging tournament phases. Next,
we discuss DarwinGame’s evaluation methodology.

4

Evaluation Methodology

Applications. We evaluate DarwinGame with four applications: Redis, GROMACS, FFmpeg, and LAMMPS –
used widely for demonstrating the effectiveness of autotuners [8, 15, 38, 43].
Redis 6.0 (serving one million requests with Redis benchmark) [19] is a high-performance, NoSQL database management system, capable of handling various data structures like

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Algorithm 1 DarwinGame Tournament for Tuning
Input: Search space 𝑆, Regions 𝑛𝑟 , Players 𝑃
Output: Optimal configuration 𝐶 ∗
Divide 𝑆 into regions 𝑅1, 𝑅2, . . . , 𝑅𝑛𝑟
for each 𝑅𝑖 in parallel do
Play Swiss style in 𝑅𝑖
𝑊𝑖 ← Winner(𝑅𝑖 )
end for
Global Phase 𝐺 ← 𝑊1,𝑊2, . . . ,𝑊𝑛𝑟
while rounds remain do
for each group 𝐺 𝑗 ⊂ 𝐺 in parallel do
Play game in 𝐺 𝑗 , calculate scores
𝐺 𝑗,𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟 ← Winner(𝐺 𝑗 )
Transfer losers to loser bracket
end for
end while
𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛_𝑏𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 _𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠 ← Winners from 𝐺
𝑃 𝑤𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑 ← Winner from loser bracket
𝑃𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑜 𝑓 𝑓 𝑠 ← 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛_𝑏𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 _𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠 ∪ 𝑃 𝑤𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑
𝑃 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑠 ← winners of 𝑃𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑜 𝑓 𝑓 𝑠 (barrage style)
Final: 𝐶 ∗ ← arg min𝐶 ∈𝑃 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑠 execution_time(𝐶)

strings, hashes, lists, and sets with high speed and reliability.
GROMACS (with water-cut benchmark) [7] is a versatile
molecular dynamics simulation software renowned for its
efficiency, scalability, and advanced simulation capabilities.
GROMACS is extensively used in computational biophysics,
chemistry, and related fields. FFmpeg (with H.264 video file
of 10 GB) [78] is a widely used multimedia framework for
handling audio, video, and other multimedia files, offering
multiple capabilities for format conversion, streaming, and
editing. We tune the compilation parameters and flags for
FFmpeg. LAMMPS [75] is a molecular dynamics simulation
software, recognized for its robustness in handling diverse
computational tasks across various scientific disciplines. All
the evaluated applications are multi-threaded; DarwinGame
does not impose restrictions on the thread counts of applications to be optimized. Instead, it allows each application to
use its optimal threading configuration, thereby adapting to
the application’s inherent parallelism.
Table 1 lists the specific application-level parameters that
we tune and the size of the search space, combining both
application-level and systems-level parameters. Different
values of these parameters directly impact the execution time
and performance variations in the cloud, without affecting
the operation or the scientific experiment being performed.
Note that, DarwinGame aims to optimize for only static
tunable parameters. For example, in multimedia processing
applications like FFmpeg, these parameters include compiler
optimization levels, loop unrolling, and vectorization flags.
These parameters are set once during compilation and directly impact the application performance across various

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Application

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari

Application-level Parameters

Redis [19]

Systems-level Parameters

tcp-backlog, rdbcompression, rdbchecksum, maxmemory, maxmemory-policy, appendonly, appendfsync,
no-appendfsync-on-rewrite, auto-aof-rewrite-percentage,
auto-aof-rewrite-min-size, lazyfree-lazy-eviction, lazyfreelazy-expire, lazyfree-lazy-server-del, hz, dynamic-hz,
active-defrag, active-defrag-threshold-upper, & activedefrag-cycle-max
GROMACS [7] integrator, nstlist, ns_type, fourier_spacing, cutoff-scheme,
& coulombtype
FFmpeg [78]
compiler optimization levels, function inlining, vectorization, vectorization cost, prefetching, loop unrolling,
link-time optimization, stack realignment, -ffast-math, fomit-frame-pointer, -fstrict-aliasing, -floop-block, -floopinterchange, & -floop-strip-mine
LAMMPS [75] neighbor skin distance, neighbor list build frequency,
timestep, output frequency, integrator, & cutoff distance

processor affinity, I/O scheduler,
read-ahead setting, vm.swappiness,
vm.dirty_ratio, vm.overcommit_memory,
vm.overcommit_ratio,
vm.dirty_background_ratio,
vm.dirty_expire_centisecs,
kernel.sched_migration_cost_ns,
kernel.timer_migration,
kernel.sched_autogroup_enabled,
kernel.sched_min_granularity_ns,
kernel.sched_wakeup_granularity_ns,
kernel.sched_rr_timeslice_ms,
kernel.sched_rt_period_us,
kernel.sched_rt_runtime_us, &
kernel.sched_latency_ns

Search
Space Size
7.8 million

3.8 million
6.1 million

4.4 million

Table 1. List of application-, systems-level parameters, and the size of search space of evaluated applications.
hardware configurations. DarwinGame focuses on refining
these static settings to achieve minimal execution time in
interference-prone cloud environments, without runtime adjustments. DarwinGame does not directly attempt to dynamically adjust parameters in the middle of execution. However,
it can extended to have such capabilities by changing the
tournament structure to introduce feedback loops in the
global, playoffs, and final phases.
Experimental testbed. We perform the main set of experiments with m5.8xlarge general-purpose VMs on AWS. We
set the value of 𝑃 (number of players playing a game together
in the regional and global phases) to 32 (number of vCPUs
in m5.8xlarge). We also evaluate DarwinGame’s effectiveness on other AWS VMs of different sizes like m5.large (2
vCPUs), m5.2xlarge (8 vCPUs), m5.16xlarge (64 vCPUs), and
m5.24xlarge (96 vCPUs). Additionally, to demonstrate DarwinGame’s effectiveness in VMs of different resource configurations, we evaluated DarwinGame with other classes of
VMs on AWS like c5.9xlarge (compute-optimized instance),
r5.8xlarge (memory-optimized instance), and i3.8xlarge
(storage-optimized instance). Table 1 lists the systems-level
parameters we tune via DarwinGame. We use taskset and
sysctl to change the different scheduling and kernel settings
affecting the systems-level parameters.
Recall from Sec. 3.2, to perform early termination of games,
DarwinGame needs to keep track of the percentage of work
completed by an application execution with different tuning configurations. This is achieved by keeping track of the
progress in processing or the amount of output produced.
For example, while evaluating Redis, we keep track of the
percentage of requests being completed. While evaluating
FFmpeg, we keep track of the percentage of frames processed.
In GROMACS and LAMMPS, we keep track of the percentage
of output produced with respect to the total output size.

Competing and complementary solutions. We compare
DarwinGame’s performance with other state-of-the-art application tuners: (a) ActiveHarmony [45] is a widely used
open-source tuning framework that uses a controller and
load balancer to navigate through the search space of an
application to determine the effect of changing parameter
values on the application performance. (b) OpenTuner [11]
is a state-of-the-art tuning solution that chooses a tuner
type based on the geometry of the search space, from a set
of pre-existing application tuners (effective and simple). (c)
BLISS [62] is a recent tuner that uses an ensemble of Bayesian
optimization kernels models to navigate through complex
search spaces (effective, but variance in noisy environments).
We show how DarwinGame can be integrated with existing solutions to improve their effectiveness – by dividing
the search space into subspaces and running DarwinGame’s
tournament within each subspace to identify optimal configurations under realistic noise conditions. Also, we compare
DarwinGame’s performance with (d) optimal (optimal configuration determined in a dedicated environment), and (e)
exhaustive search (exhaustively searching all configurations
in a cloud-based environment), as described in Sec. 2. These
solutions are practically infeasible but they provide a measure to determine the performance upper bound.
Evaluation metrics. We measure the execution time of an
application in a cloud-based VM with a tuning configuration to determine execution time-wise tuning performance.
Additionally, we repeat an application execution 100 times
with the tuned configuration and report the coefficient of
variation of execution time as a measure of the variations in
performance of a tuning configuration. Since, tuning within
different phases can be parallelized, DarwinGame uses the
core-hours required to perform tuning as a measure of the
amount of resources and time used to tune an application.

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments
Redis

GROMACS

FFmpeg

Redis

LAMMPS

ActiveHarmony

GROMACS

FFmpeg

LAMMPS

ActiveHarmony

OpenTuner

OpenTuner

BLISS

BLISS

Exhaustive

Exhaustive

DarwinGame

DarwinGame
0

2250

750

1500

0

420

280

0

140

2800

2100

1400

0

700

450

300

150

Optimal
0

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Execution Time (s)

Figure 10. DarwinGame is closer to Oracle than other competing solutions. The error bars denote the range of execution
time variation when tuning is repeated 100 times separately.

3

6
9 12 0
3
6
9 12 0
3
6
9 12 0
3
6
9
Coefficient of Variation of Execution Time across Multiple Executions
with the Chosen Tuning Configuration (%)

12

Figure 11. Application execution with DarwinGame’s tuned
configuration results in lower variations.
Redis

GROMACS

FFmpeg

LAMMPS

ActiveHarmony

5

Evaluation and Analysis

Can DarwinGame perform more effective auto-tuning
in the interference-prone cloud-based execution environment, especially compared to existing interferenceunaware performance tuners? Recall from Sec. 2 (Fig. 3)
that in the interference-prone execution environment, existing solutions perform poorly compared to the optimal
solution because they are not designed to incorporate the effect of noise and resource contention during the performance
tuning process.
DarwinGame’s design helps it to bridge the gap between
optimal and existing solutions – in particular, two design
features: playing games together to measure the relative
performance of different tuning configurations and the tournament structure which ensures that the top contenders are
tested multiple times to assess their true potential. From
Fig. 10, we observe that on average, DarwinGame results
in only 4.2% more execution time than optimal, while the
next best tuner (BLISS), results in more than 40% increased
execution time than the optimal solution.
Since the tuning configurations playing a game together
are expected to be impacted by a similar amount of noise in
the cloud, DarwinGame’s relative measurement of application execution time with different tuning configurations is
more consistent than other solutions. This is why, as seen
in Fig. 10, the variation range in the execution time (error
bars), when DarwinGame’s tuning is repeated 100 times, is
significantly less than other solutions. In fact, out of the 100
times, DarwinGame picks the same tuning configuration 93
times as its final output, while the next best tuner picks 42
different tuning configurations.
Note that, it is possible for DarwinGame to tune dynamically adjustable parameters like thread count of applications
by tweaking the tournament structure to introduce feedback
loops in later phases (e.g., global phase or playoffs), where the
system dynamically re-ranks configurations based on their
performance after adjustments during application execution. However, DarwinGame does not perform this dynamic
parameter tuning because, in our experimental evaluation,
this approach often significantly increased the time and resources used for tuning (over 10%) for limited performance
improvements (less than 5%).

OpenTuner
BLISS
DarwinGame
0

3

6

9 0
3
6
9 0
3
6
9 0
Core-Hours for Tuning (% of Exhaustive Search)

3

6

9

Figure 12. DarwinGame’s resource requirements for tuning
are less than other state-of-the-art solutions, in most cases.
Does DarwinGame’s picked tuning configuration exhibit a lesser degree of performance variation compared to alternative solutions? DarwinGame picks tuning
configurations that exhibit less variation in performance
across multiple runs in the cloud. The purpose of DarwinGame is to execute tuned applications in the cloud without the need to actively control the type of co-located applications. So, while cloud interference distribution shifts are
possible, several design components of DarwinGame aim to
make it resilient to such varying levels of interference.
As shown in Fig. 11, DarwinGame leads to lesser variations in performance. The coefficient of variation in execution time in the cloud with DarwinGame’s chosen tuning
configurations is 0.46%, while for all other solutions, it is
more than 6%, when an application is executed 100 times
with the chosen tuning configuration, at different periods of
time, in the cloud. This is because, throughout the tournament, DarwinGame makes several efforts to ensure that the
chosen tuning configuration has fewer variations in performance – that is, less sensitivity to performance interference
in the cloud. These efforts include playing multiple games
with promising configurations across various phases with
different opponents. This ensures that the performance of
the chosen tuning configuration remains consistent across
multiple executions with different levels of contention and
noise. Also, DarwinGame takes into account the consistency
score while deciding the winners of the global phase.
How does the amount of resources consumed during
DarwinGame’s tuning compare to existing solutions?
Fig. 12 shows the core-hours required by DarwinGame to
complete the tuning process. Since the exhaustive search requires the most resources to perform the tuning, the required
core-hours of all other solutions are expressed as a percentage of the exhaustive search. Exhaustive search requires

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari

9%

17%

14%

22%

20%

17%

13%

400

12%

100

21%

19%

0

3

50%

6

FFmpeg

21%

18%

37%

9 0 3 6 9 0 3 6 9 0
Core-Hours for Tuning (% of Exhaustive Search)

Figure 15. DarwinGame’s effectiveness is consistent across
different classes and sizes of VMs in the cloud (Redis serving
one million requests).

LAMMPS

19%

3

6

9

Figure 14. DarwinGame can be integrated with existing solutions to reduce their tuning resource requirements.
9124, 27124, 12778, and 25523 core-hours on m5.8xlarge VM
for Redis, GROMACS, FFmpeg, and LAMMPS, respectively.
We observe that in most cases, DarwinGame’s tuning resource requirements are lesser than other solutions. This
is because of DarwinGame’s resource-aware design components such as early termination of games and playing
games with more than two players in the initial phases of
the tournament. In some cases, the required core-hours of
DarwinGame are slightly higher than a competing solution
because of more runs required to assess the interferencesensitivity of certain tuning configurations. The resourceaware design of DarwinGame also helps it to reduce tuning
costs of applications in the cloud; the tuning cost can be
amortized over 142, 107, 121, and 136 runs of tuned Redis,
GROMACS, FFmpeg, and LAMMPS, respectively.
Can DarwinGame improve the effectiveness of existing
auto-tuners in a complementary manner? In Sec. 3.6,
we discussed how DarwinGame’s tournament-based tuning
strategy can be integrated with existing tuning solutions to
improve their effectiveness (except OpenTuner due to the
non-compatible nature of the search process).
From Fig. 13, we observe that DarwinGame can be integrated with ActiveHarmony and BLISS to improve the
application execution time-wise performance by more than
15%, on average. This improvement is observed because playing DarwinGame’s tournament inside each region selected
via an existing tuner’s optimization logic helps to better estimate the relative performance of application execution in
the cloud with different tuning configurations, as the noise
in the cloud changes. Due to DarwinGame’s early termination and reducing the number of sampling by playing games
with multiple players, benefits are also observed in terms of
the resource requirements, when DarwinGame is integrated
with the existing solutions (Fig. 14).

e
rge
rge
rge
rge
rge
rge
larg
xla
xla
xla
xla
9xla
.8x
.16
.24
i3.8
r5.8
c5.
m5
m5
m5

la
.2x

m5

Execution Time
60
30

Coefficient of Variation
of Execution Time

Core-Hours

Redis

0
60
30

GROMACS

0
60
30

FFmpeg

0
60
30

LAMMPS

0

re w
gi /o
on
al
o
re ne
gi -w
on in
al

18%

GROMACS

m5

Execution Time, Coefficient of Variation of
Execution Time, Core-Hours (% increase w.r.t
DarwinGame)

Redis

e

g
.lar

2250

1500

750

420
0

280

140

450
0
700
1400
2100
2800
0

300

150

0

Execution Time (s)

DarwinGame

200

0

Figure 13. DarwinGame can be integrated with existing solutions to improve their effectiveness.
ActiveHarmony
ActiveHarmony+
DarwinGame
BLISS
BLISS+
DarwinGame

Oracle
300

do w
ub /o
le
el
i.
w
/o
ba
rr
ag
e
st w/o
en c
cy on
sc sior
e
ex w
e. /o
sc
or
al
e
l2
ga -pl
m ay
es er
te w/o
rm e
in ar
at ly
io
n

LAMMPS

gl w/o
ob
al

FFmpeg

Sw w/o
is
s

GROMACS

Execution Time (s)

Redis
ActiveHarmony
ActiveHarmony+
DarwinGame
BLISS
BLISS+
DarwinGame

Figure 16. DarwinGame performs better than alternative tournament structures.
DarwinGame takes into account the consistency of performance while judging winners and plays multiple rounds
of games with winning configurations to ensure the performance guarantees of the selected tuning configuration. This
lowers the performance variations (coefficient of variation
of execution time) when DarwinGame is integrated with
ActiveHarmony and BLISS by 6.8% and 5.9%, respectively.
Are DarwinGame’s benefits sensitive to or tied to one
particular cloud-based VM instance type? We perform
experiments to determine DarwinGame’s performance when
both application tuning and execution are performed in different types and sizes of VMs. Different VMs have different
amounts of interference (smaller VMs have higher interference due to the co-location of more tenants).
In Fig. 15 we observe that DarwinGame’s execution timewise performance always remains within 10% of the Oracle
solution. Also, the coefficient of variation of execution time
with DarwinGame’s chosen tuning configuration remains
less than 0.46%. These results experimentally confirm that
DarwinGame’s design components are generally applicable
and the benefits are not tied to a particular VM type.
How does DarwinGame’s tournament structure design
help to achieve its effectiveness? DarwinGame’s tournament design consists of multiple tournament phases and
gaming styles – the first of them is the regional phase, which
is played in Swiss style. In Fig. 16, we show the results for the
case when DarwinGame was played without a regional phase

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments

(w/o regional phase), and treating all players from the start in
the global phase. We observe that the resultant performance
in terms of execution time and performance variations deteriorate due to promising configurations getting eliminated
early or not getting a chance to play. If in the regional phase,
only one winner was selected per region (one-win regional),
instead of DarwinGame’s design of choosing the number of
winners based on how good the overall regional performance
is, then also the performance deteriorates due to promising
players getting eliminated. Performance deterioration is also
observed when the regional phase is not played in Swiss
style (w/o Swiss), where only one game among all players
selects the regional phase winners.
The next key design element in DarwinGame is the global
phase, played in double elimination style. Without the global
phase (w/o global), DarwinGame’s execution time and performance variations increase. In such a case, only one game is
played among all regional winners to choose the players for
the playoffs. We observe that for FFmpeg, without the double elimination (w/o double eli.) format, the execution time
and performance variations increase, as the winner from
the loser bracket finally wins the tournament for FFmpeg.
Without barrage-styled playoffs (w/o barrage), performance
deteriorates for FFmpeg and LAMMPS as the loser of the
first playoff actually wins the tournament.
A notable key element in DarwinGame’s design is the joint
use of consistency and execution score. Using one of them,
and not both (w/o consistency score, w/o exe. score), degrades DarwinGame’s effectiveness, as both of these scores
jointly determine the configuration that yields low execution
time and consistent performance in the cloud. Without DarwinGame’s design feature to reduce tuning time by playing
games among multiple players in the initial phases (playing
only two-player games – all 2-player games), and without
early termination (w/o early termination), DarwinGame’s
resource usage in terms of core-hours for tuning can increase
by more than 30%. Fig. 16 summarizes how DarwinGame’s
design elements contribute to its effectiveness.

6

Related Works

The complexity and importance of performance tuning in
software systems are well-recognized [12, 20, 21, 34, 53, 57,
81]. Recent research has focused on automated methods:
heuristic-based optimization like genetic algorithms and
simulated annealing, machine learning approaches such as
reinforcement learning and Bayesian optimization, and adaptive tuning systems [6, 13, 22, 33, 36, 40, 41, 51, 63, 69, 87].
Heuristic methods offer structured ways to navigate search
spaces but can be hindered by scalability and computational overheads, limiting effectiveness in dynamic environments like the cloud [37, 48]. Machine learning-based
approaches predict optimal configurations efficiently, with
Bayesian optimization suitable for high-dimensional settings

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

despite needing extensive training data [23, 27, 39, 49, 54–
56, 62, 72]. Hybrid approaches, combining heuristics and
machine learning, aim to balance exploration and exploitation but face challenges in computational cost and robustness [86]. Adaptive tuning systems continuously adjust
configurations in real time using feedback loops and control theory. These systems are hindered by noise, unpredictability, and latency in responding to performance fluctuations [14, 16, 24, 52, 59, 60, 77, 84].
All existing tuning solutions rely on executing an application multiple times to determine the relative performance
of an application execution with different tuning configurations. These solutions work when tuning is performed in a
dedicated environment [11, 52, 54, 62, 71, 81, 85]. However,
when performing tuning in the cloud, a major obstacle is
the inherent noise and variability in cloud environments,
which can obscure the true performance impact of different configurations [10, 28, 89]. Existing tuning methods assume a stable tuning environment, leading to suboptimal
performance when used in production cloud settings. Moreover, there is a need for tuning solutions that can identify
configurations with both low execution times and minimal
performance variability. This gap underscores the necessity
for novel approaches that can effectively account for and
mitigate the impact of cloud-induced noise, ensuring reliable
and consistent performance tuning.

7

Conclusion

DarwinGame is a novel tuning framework that effectively
handles the noise and variability in cloud environments.
DarwinGame plays a tournament among multiple tuning
configurations, with different phases of the tournaments customized to ensure finding tuning configurations with both
low execution times and reduced performance variability.
DarwinGame’s evaluation demonstrates significant improvements – achieving more than 27% reduction in execution
time compared to other existing solutions while limiting the
performance variation to less than 0.5%, marking a substantial advancement in the field.
Acknowledgments. We thank Cliff Young (our shepherd)
and the other anonymous reviewers for their constructive
feedback. The work is supported by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering under Air
Force Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001, and United States Air
Force Research Laboratory Cooperative Agreement Number FA8750-19-2- 1000, and partially also supported by by
NSF Awards 1910601 and 2124897. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering, or the United States Air Force. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation herein.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

References
[1] Berkeley Research Computing (BRC) Node Sharing, url:
https://docs-research-it.berkeley.edu/services/high-performancecomputing/condos/condo-cluster-service/.
[2] Match Formats | Camberwell Petanque Club — camberwellpetanqueclub.org.au. https://www.camberwellpetanqueclub.org.au/content/
match-formats.
[3] Node Sharing Policy at CHPC, Utah, url: https://www.chpc.utah.edu/
documentation/software/node-sharing.php.
[4] SDSC Condo HPC model, url: https://www.hpcwire.com/2020/08/10/
high-performance-computing-at-condo-prices/.
[5] Tournament formats – an overview. https://petanquerules.wordpress.
com/tournament-systems.
[6] Ahmad Abdelfattah, Azzam Haidar, Stanimire Tomov, and Jack Dongarra. Performance, Design, and Autotuning of Batched GEMM for
GPUs. In International Conference on High Performance Computing,
pages 21–38. Springer, 2016.
[7] Mark James Abraham, Teemu Murtola, Roland Schulz, Szilárd Páll,
Jeremy C Smith, Berk Hess, and Erik Lindahl. Gromacs: High performance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism from
laptops to supercomputers. SoftwareX, 1:19–25, 2015.
[8] Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and
Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pages
2623–2631, 2019.
[9] Tanweer Alam. Cloud computing and its role in the information
technology. IAIC Transactions on Sustainable Digital Innovation (ITSDI),
1(2):108–115, 2020.
[10] Ahmed Ali-Eldin, Bin Wang, and Prashant Shenoy. The hidden cost
of the edge: a performance comparison of edge and cloud latencies.
In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–12, 2021.
[11] Jason Ansel, Shoaib Kamil, Kalyan Veeramachaneni, Jonathan RaganKelley, Jeffrey Bosboom, Una-May O’Reilly, and Saman Amarasinghe.
Opentuner: An extensible framework for program autotuning. In
Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Parallel architectures
and compilation, pages 303–316, 2014.
[12] Jason Ansel, Maciej Pacula, Yee Lok Wong, Cy Chan, Marek Olszewski,
Una-May O’Reilly, and Saman Amarasinghe. Siblingrivalry: online
autotuning through local competitions. In Proceedings of the 2012
international conference on Compilers, architectures and synthesis for
embedded systems, pages 91–100, 2012.
[13] Sara S Baghsorkhi, Matthieu Delahaye, William D Gropp, and W Hwu
Wen-mei. Analytical performance prediction for evaluation and tuning
of gpgpu applications. In Workshop on EPHAM2009, 2009.
[14] Prasanna Balaprakash, Jack Dongarra, Todd Gamblin, Mary Hall, Jeffrey K Hollingsworth, Boyana Norris, and Richard Vuduc. Autotuning
in high-performance computing applications. Proceedings of the IEEE,
106(11):2068–2083, 2018.
[15] Liang Bao, Xin Liu, Fangzheng Wang, and Baoyin Fang. Actgan:
automatic configuration tuning for software systems with generative
adversarial networks. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pages 465–476. IEEE, 2019.
[16] Babak Behzad, Surendra Byna, Prabhat, and Marc Snir. Optimizing i/o
performance of hpc applications with autotuning. ACM Transactions
on Parallel Computing (TOPC), 5(4):1–27, 2019.
[17] Greg Bronevetsky, John Gyllenhaal, and Bronis R De Supinski. CLOMP:
Accurately Characterizing OpenMP Application Overheads. In International Workshop on OpenMP, pages 13–25. Springer, 2008.
[18] Rajkumar Buyya, Satish Narayana Srirama, Giuliano Casale, Rodrigo
Calheiros, Yogesh Simmhan, Blesson Varghese, Erol Gelenbe, Bahman
Javadi, Luis Miguel Vaquero, Marco AS Netto, et al. A manifesto for
future generation cloud computing: Research directions for the next

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari
decade. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 51(5):1–38, 2018.
[19] Josiah Carlson. Redis in action. Simon and Schuster, 2013.
[20] Sanjay Chatterjee, Nick Vrvilo, Zoran Budimlic, Kathleen Knobe, and
Vivek Sarkar. Declarative tuning for locality in parallel programs. In
45th International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP), 2016.
[21] Guangyu Chen et al. Tuning garbage collection in an embedded java
environment. In HPCA. IEEE, 2002.
[22] Ray S Chen and Jeffrey K Hollingsworth. Angel: A Hierarchical Approach to Multi-Objective Online Auto-Tuning. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Runtime and Operating Systems for Supercomputers, pages 1–8, 2015.
[23] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie
Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis
Ceze, et al. {TVM}: An Automated End-to-End Optimizing Compiler
for Deep Learning. In 13th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 18), pages 578–594, 2018.
[24] Younghyun Cho, Camilo A Celis Guzman, and Bernhard Egger. Maximizing system utilization via parallelism management for co-located
parallel applications. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques, pages 1–14, 2018.
[25] Marcin Copik, Marcin Chrapek, Larissa Schmid, Alexandru Calotoiu,
and Torsten Hoefler. Software resource disaggregation for hpc with
serverless computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10852, 2024.
[26] László Csató. Tournament design: How operations research can improve
sports rules. Springer Nature, 2021.
[27] Valentin Dalibard, Michael Schaarschmidt, and Eiko Yoneki. Boat:
Building auto-tuners with structured bayesian optimization. In WWW,
pages 479–488, 2017.
[28] Daniele De Sensi, Tiziano De Matteis, Konstantin Taranov, Salvatore
Di Girolamo, Tobias Rahn, and Torsten Hoefler. Noise in the clouds:
Influence of network performance variability on application scalability.
Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing
Systems, 6(3):1–27, 2022.
[29] Christina Delimitrou and Christos Kozyrakis. Hcloud: Resourceefficient provisioning in shared cloud systems. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-First International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pages 473–488, 2016.
[30] Timothy DeStefano, Richard Kneller, and Jonathan Timmis. Cloud
computing and firm growth. Review of Economics and Statistics, pages
1–47, 2023.
[31] Yufei Ding et al. Autotuning algorithmic choice for input sensitivity.
In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation (PLDI), 2015.
[32] An Vinh Nguyen Dinh, Nhien Pham Hoang Bao, Mohd Nor Akmal
Khalid, and Hiroyuki Iida. Simulating competitiveness and precision
in a tournament structure: A reaper tournament system. International
Journal of Information Technology, 12:1–18, 2020.
[33] Yuri Dotsenko, Sara S Baghsorkhi, Brandon Lloyd, and Naga K Govindaraju. Auto-tuning of fast fourier transform on graphics processors.
ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 46(8):257–266, 2011.
[34] Thomas L Falch and Anne C Elster. Machine Learning based AutoTuning for Enhanced OpenCL Performance Portability. In 2015 IEEE
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshop,
pages 1231–1240. IEEE, 2015.
[35] Pascal Führlich, Ágnes Cseh, and Pascal Lenzner. Improving ranking
quality and fairness in swiss-system chess tournaments. In Proceedings
of the 23rd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 1101–
1102, 2022.
[36] Michael Gerndt and Michael Ott. Automatic Performance Analysis
with Periscope. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience,
22(6):736–748, 2010.
[37] Mojtaba Ghasemi, Mohsen Zare, Amir Zahedi, Mohammad-Amin Akbari, Seyedali Mirjalili, and Laith Abualigah. Geyser inspired algorithm: a new geological-inspired meta-heuristic for real-parameter and
constrained engineering optimization. Journal of Bionic Engineering,

DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments
21(1):374–408, 2024.
[38] Fabio Alexander Gratl, Steffen Seckler, Nikola Tchipev, Hans-Joachim
Bungartz, and Philipp Neumann. Autopas: Auto-tuning for particle
simulations. In 2019 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW), pages 748–757. IEEE, 2019.
[39] Alexander Grebhahn, Norbert Siegmund, Harald Köstler, and Sven
Apel. Performance Prediction of Multigrid-Solver Configurations. In
Software for Exascale Computing-SPPEXA 2013-2015. Springer, 2016.
[40] Philipp Gschwandtner et al. Multi-Objective Auto-Tuning with Insieme: Optimization and Trade-Off Analysis for Time, Energy and
Resource Usage. In European Conference on Parallel Processing, 2014.
[41] Hui Guo, Ignacio Laguna, and Cindy Rubio-González. pliner: isolating
lines of floating-point code for compiler-induced variability. In International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage
and Analysis (SC), pages 680–693. IEEE Computer Society, 2020.
[42] Abhishek Gupta and Dejan Milojicic. Evaluation of hpc applications
on cloud. In 2011 Sixth Open Cirrus Summit, pages 22–26. IEEE, 2011.
[43] Scott S Hampton, Sadaf R Alam, Paul S Crozier, and Pratul K Agarwal. Optimal utilization of heterogeneous resources for biomolecular
simulations. In SC’10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, pages 1–11. IEEE, 2010.
[44] Christine Harbring and Bernd Irlenbusch. An experimental study on
tournament design. Labour Economics, 10(4):443–464, 2003.
[45] Jeffrey Hollingsworth and Ananta Tiwari. End-to-end auto-tuning
with active harmony. Performance tuning of scientific applications,
pages 217–238, 2010.
[46] Jeffrey K Hollingsworth and Peter J Keleher. Prediction and Adaptation
in Active Harmony. Cluster Computing, 2(3):195, 1999.
[47] Christopher Hua. The swiss tournament model. 2017.
[48] Changwu Huang, Yuanxiang Li, and Xin Yao. A survey of automatic
parameter tuning methods for metaheuristics. IEEE transactions on
evolutionary computation, 24(2):201–216, 2019.
[49] Pooyan Jamshidi, Miguel Velez, Christian Kästner, Norbert Siegmund,
and Prasad Kawthekar. Transfer Learning for Improving Model Predictions in Highly Configurable Software. In 2017 IEEE/ACM 12th
International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and
Self-Managing Systems, 2017.
[50] Cristian Klein, Martina Maggio, Karl-Erik Årzén, and Francisco
Hernández-Rodriguez. Brownout: Building more robust cloud applications. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
Engineering, pages 700–711, 2014.
[51] Adam J Kunen, Teresa S Bailey, and Peter N Brown. KRIPKE: A Massively Parallel Transport Mini-App. Technical report, Lawrence Livermore National Lab.(LLNL), Livermore, CA (United States), 2015.
[52] Chendi Li, Yufan Xu, Sina Mahdipour Saravani, and Ponnuswamy
Sadayappan. Accelerated auto-tuning of gpu kernels for tensor computations. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM International Conference on
Supercomputing, pages 549–561, 2024.
[53] Xiaqing Li, Qi Guo, Guangyan Zhang, Siwei Ye, Guanhua He, Yiheng
Yao, Rui Zhang, Yifan Hao, Zidong Du, and Weimin Zheng. Fasttuning:
Enabling fast and efficient hyper-parameter tuning with partitioning
and parallelism of search space. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, 2024.
[54] Yang Liu, Wissam M Sid-Lakhdar, Osni Marques, Xinran Zhu, Chang
Meng, James W Demmel, and Xiaoye S Li. Gptune: multitask learning
for autotuning exascale applications. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming,
pages 234–246, 2021.
[55] Aniruddha Marathe et al. Performance Modeling Under Resource
Constraints Using Deep Transfer Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis, pages 1–12, 2017.
[56] Harshitha Menon, Abhinav Bhatele, and Todd Gamblin. Auto-tuning
parameter choices in hpc applications using bayesian optimization. In

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

IPDPS, pages 831–840. IEEE, 2020.
[57] William F Ogilvie, Pavlos Petoumenos, Zheng Wang, and Hugh Leather.
Minimizing the Cost of Iterative Compilation with Active Learning.
In 2017 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization (CGO), 2017.
[58] Arun Rajkumar, Vishnu Veerathu, and Abdul Bakey Mir. A theory of
tournament representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05188, 2021.
[59] Arun Raman, Ayal Zaks, Jae W Lee, and David I August. Parcae: a
system for flexible parallel execution. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 47(6):133–
144, 2012.
[60] Ari Rasch, Richard Schulze, Michel Steuwer, and Sergei Gorlatch. Efficient auto-tuning of parallel programs with interdependent tuning
parameters via auto-tuning framework (atf). ACM Transactions on
Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO), 18(1):1–26, 2021.
[61] Albert Reuther, Peter Michaleas, Michael Jones, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth Samsi, and Jeremy Kepner. Survey of machine learning accelerators. In 2020 IEEE high performance extreme computing conference
(HPEC), pages 1–12. IEEE, 2020.
[62] Rohan Basu Roy, Tirthak Patel, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari.
Bliss: auto-tuning complex applications using a pool of diverse lightweight learning models. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 1280–1295, 2021.
[63] Cindy Rubio-González, Cuong Nguyen, Hong Diep Nguyen, James
Demmel, William Kahan, Koushik Sen, David H Bailey, Costin Iancu,
and David Hough. Precimonious: Tuning assistant for floating-point
precision. In SC, 2013.
[64] Dmitry Ryvkin and Andreas Ortmann. The predictive power of three
prominent tournament formats. Management Science, 54(3):492–504,
2008.
[65] Vivek Sarkar. Ddaring: Dynamic data aware reconfiguration, integration and generation. Technical report, GEORGIA TECH RESEARCH
CORPORATION Atlanta United States, 2020.
[66] Vivek Sarkar, William Harrod, and Allan E Snavely. Software challenges in extreme scale systems. In Journal of Physics: Conference
Series. IOP Publishing, 2009.
[67] Hossein Shafiei, Ahmad Khonsari, and Payam Mousavi. Serverless
computing: a survey of opportunities, challenges, and applications.
ACM Computing Surveys, 54(11s):1–32, 2022.
[68] Cristina Silvano, Giovanni Agosta, Stefano Cherubin, Davide Gadioli, Gianluca Palermo, Andrea Bartolini, Luca Benini, Jan Martinovič,
Martin Palkovič, Kateřina Slaninová, et al. The antarex approach to
autotuning and adaptivity for energy efficient hpc systems. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers,
pages 288–293, 2016.
[69] Cristina Silvano et al. AutoTuning and Adaptivity AppRoach for
Energy Efficient EXascale HPC Systems: The ANTAREX Approach.
In 2016 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition
(DATE), pages 708–713. IEEE, 2016.
[70] Nikolay A Simakov, Robert L DeLeon, Joseph P White, Thomas R
Furlani, Martins Innus, Steven M Gallo, Matthew D Jones, Abani Patra,
Benjamin D Plessinger, Jeanette Sperhac, et al. A quantitative analysis
of node sharing on hpc clusters using xdmod application kernels. In
Proceedings of the XSEDE16 Conference on Diversity, Big Data, and
Science at Scale, pages 1–8, 2016.
[71] Mohammed Sourouri, Espen Birger Raknes, Nico Reissmann, Johannes
Langguth, Daniel Hackenberg, Robert Schöne, and Per Gunnar Kjeldsberg. Towards fine-grained dynamic tuning of hpc applications on
modern multi-core architectures. In Proceedings of the International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, pages 1–12, 2017.
[72] Artur Souza, Luigi Nardi, Leonardo B Oliveira, Kunle Olukotun, Marius
Lindauer, and Frank Hutter. Prior-guided bayesian optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.14608, 2020.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
[73] Cristian Tapus, I-Hsin Chung, and Jeffrey K Hollingsworth. Active
Harmony: Towards Automated Performance Tuning. In Proceedings
of the 2002 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing (SC), 2002.
[74] Jayaraman J Thiagarajan, Nikhil Jain, Rushil Anirudh, Alfredo
Gimenez, Rahul Sridhar, Aniruddha Marathe, Tao Wang, Murali Emani,
Abhinav Bhatele, and Todd Gamblin. Bootstrapping parameter space
exploration for fast tuning. In Proceedings of the 2018 International
Conference on Supercomputing, pages 385–395, 2018.
[75] Aidan P Thompson, H Metin Aktulga, Richard Berger, Dan S Bolintineanu, W Michael Brown, Paul S Crozier, Pieter J In’t Veld, Axel
Kohlmeyer, Stan G Moore, Trung Dac Nguyen, et al. Lammps-a
flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the
atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Computer Physics Communications, 271:108171, 2022.
[76] Ananta Tiwari et al. Auto-tuning full applications: A case study. The
International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications,
25(3):286–294, 2011.
[77] Ananta Tiwari et al. Online Adaptive Code Generation and Tuning.
In 2011 IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium,
pages 879–892. IEEE, 2011.
[78] Suramya Tomar. Converting video formats with ffmpeg. Linux journal,
2006(146):10, 2006.
[79] Blesson Varghese and Rajkumar Buyya. Next generation cloud computing: New trends and research directions. Future Generation Computer
Systems, 79:849–861, 2018.
[80] Andreas Wittig and Michael Wittig. Amazon Web Services in Action:
An in-depth guide to AWS. Simon and Schuster, 2023.
[81] Chaofeng Wu et al. Paraopt: Automated application parameterization
and optimization for the cloud. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), pages 255–262.
IEEE, 2019.

Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari
[82] Xingfu Wu, Prasanna Balaprakash, Michael Kruse, Jaehoon Koo, Brice
Videau, Paul Hovland, Valerie Taylor, Brad Geltz, Siddhartha Jana,
and Mary Hall. ytopt: Autotuning scientific applications for energy
efficiency at large scales. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16245, 2023.
[83] Qingqing Xiong, Emre Ates, Martin C Herbordt, and Ayse K Coskun.
Tangram: Colocating hpc applications with oversubscription. In 2018
IEEE High Performance extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pages
1–7. IEEE, 2018.
[84] Jinchen Xu, Guanghui Song, Bei Zhou, Fei Li, Jiangwei Hao, and Jie
Zhao. A holistic approach to automatic mixed-precision code generation and tuning for affine programs. In Proceedings of the 29th
ACM SIGPLAN Annual Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel
Programming, pages 55–67, 2024.
[85] Tiannuo Yang, Ruobing Chen, Yusen Li, Xiaoguang Liu, and Gang
Wang. Cotuner: A hierarchical learning framework for coordinately
optimizing resource partitioning and parameter tuning. In Proceedings
of the 52nd International Conference on Parallel Processing, pages 317–
326, 2023.
[86] Tong Yu and Hong Zhu. Hyper-parameter optimization: A review of
algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05689, 2020.
[87] Huazhe Zhang and Henry Hoffmann. Maximizing Performance under a Power Cap: A Comparison of Hardware, Software, and Hybrid
Techniques. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 51(4):545–559, 2016.
[88] Xiantao Zhang, Xiao Zheng, Zhi Wang, Hang Yang, Yibin Shen, and
Xin Long. High-density multi-tenant bare-metal cloud. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pages 483–495,
2020.
[89] Yuqing Zhu and Jianxun Liu. Classytune: A performance auto-tuner
for systems in the cloud. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing,
10(1):234–246, 2019.

