AMuLeT: Automated Design-Time Testing of Secure
Speculation Countermeasures
Bo Fu∗

Leo Tenenbaum∗

David Adler

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
fubof@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
leo.tenenbaum@mail.utoronto.ca

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
d.adler@mail.utoronto.ca

Assaf Klein

Arpit Gogia

Alaa R. Alameldeen

Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology
Haifa, Israel
assafklein@campus.technion.ac.il

IMDEA Software Institute
Madrid, Spain
arpitgogia@proton.me

Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, Canada
alaa@sfu.ca

Marco Guarnieri

Mark Silberstein

Oleksii Oleksenko

IMDEA Software Institute
Madrid, Spain
marco.guarnieri@imdea.org

Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology
Haifa, Israel
mark@ee.technion.ac.il

Azure Research, Microsoft
Cambridge, United Kingdom
oleksii.oleksenko@microsoft.com

Gururaj Saileshwar
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
gururaj@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In recent years, several hardware-based countermeasures
proposed to mitigate Spectre attacks have been shown to
be insecure. To enable the development of effective secure
speculation countermeasures, we need easy-to-use tools that
can automatically test their security guarantees early-on in
the design phase to facilitate rapid prototyping.
This paper develops AMuLeT, the first tool capable of
testing secure speculation countermeasures for speculative
leakage early in their design phase in simulators. Our key
idea is to leverage model-based relational testing tools that
can detect speculative leaks in commercial CPUs, and apply
them to micro-architectural simulators to test secure speculation defenses. We identify and overcome several challenges,
∗ Bo and Leo contributed equally as lead authors for this paper

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716247

including designing an expressive yet realistic attacker observer model in a simulator, overcoming the slow simulation speed, and searching the vast micro-architectural state
space for potential vulnerabilities. AMuLeT speeds up test
throughput by more than 10× compared to a naive design
and uses techniques to amplify vulnerabilities to uncover
them within a limited test budget. Using AMuLeT, we launch
for the first time, a systematic, large-scale testing campaign
of four secure speculation countermeasures from 2018 to
2024—InvisiSpec, CleanupSpec, STT, and SpecLFB—and uncover 3 known and 6 unknown bugs and vulnerabilities,
within 3 hours of testing. We also show for the first time that
the open-source implementation of SpecLFB is insecure.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Security in
hardware.
Keywords: Side Channels, Spectre, Defenses, Fuzzing
ACM Reference Format:
Bo Fu, Leo Tenenbaum, David Adler, Assaf Klein, Arpit Gogia,
Alaa R. Alameldeen, Marco Guarnieri, Mark Silberstein, Oleksii
Oleksenko, and Gururaj Saileshwar. 2025. AMuLeT: Automated
Design-Time Testing of Secure Speculation Countermeasures. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3676641.3716247

