PipeLLM: Fast and Confidential Large Language Model
Services with Speculative Pipelined Encryption
To appear in ASPLOS 2025
Yifan Tan1,3 , Cheng Tan2 , Zeyu Mi1,3 , and Haibo Chen1,3

1 Institute of Parallel and Distributed Systems, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2 Northeastern University

arXiv:2411.03357v1 [cs.CR] 4 Nov 2024

3 Engineering Research Center for Domain-specific Operating Systems, Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Confidential computing on GPUs, like NVIDIA H100, mitigates the security risks of outsourced Large Language Models
(LLMs) by implementing strong isolation and data encryption. Nonetheless, this encryption incurs a significant performance overhead, reaching up to 52.8% and 88.2% throughput
drop when serving OPT-30B and OPT-66B, respectively.
To address this challenge, we introduce PipeLLM, a usertransparent runtime system. PipeLLM removes the overhead by overlapping the encryption and GPU computation
through pipelining—an idea inspired by the CPU instruction pipelining—thereby effectively concealing the latency
increase caused by encryption. The primary technical challenge is that, unlike CPUs, the encryption module lacks
prior knowledge of the specific data needing encryption
until it is requested by the GPUs. To this end, we propose
speculative pipelined encryption to predict the data requiring encryption by analyzing the serving patterns of LLMs.
Further, we have developed an efficient, low-cost pipeline
relinquishing approach for instances of incorrect predictions.
Our experiments on NVIDIA H100 GPU show that compared
with vanilla systems without confidential computing (e.g.,
vLLM, PEFT, and FlexGen), PipeLLM incurs modest overhead
(<19.6% in throughput) across various LLM sizes, from 13B
to 175B.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used across
various applications [33, 53]. With the growth of open-source
LLMs [23, 48, 52], companies are integrating and fine-tuning
these models into their business operations.
Due to LLM’s reliance on high-end GPUs, many businesses
opt for outsourced services, such as cloud, attracted by their
high availability and flexible pay-as-you-go models. However, these cloud infrastructures, often complex in nature,
encompass a large Trusted Computing Base (TCB), which
may contain vulnerabilities, both publicly reported and zeroday [8, 28]. This poses security risks for LLMs, which are
usually fine-tuned with proprietary data, and user prompts
that contain sensitive business information. Thus, any data
breach could expose critical business secrets.

To mitigate these security threats, people introduce confidential computing. Confidential computing is designed to
safeguard tenants’ code and data against untrusted privileged software and rogue employees of cloud providers. The
confidential virtual machine (CVM), supported by technologies such as Intel TDX [18], AMD SEV [2], and ARM CCA [3],
serves as a prime example of this. Any software external to
a CVM is unable to access the code and data within it.
Regarding machine learning workloads, people develop
GPU enclaves to enhance security measures within GPUs [36,
50]. A notable implementation of this is the NVIDIA H100
GPU [36], which supports confidential computing inside the
GPU to protect sensitive data and models from unauthorized
access. Moreover, the data communication between the CVM
and the GPU enclave is encrypted, further reinforcing the
security of I/O operations.
Although GPU confidential computing effectively enhances
security for traditional small-scale AI models, it significantly
undermines the performance of LLMs in throughput and
latency. Our comprehensive experiments on NVIDIA H100
GPUs reveal that the GPU enclave can incur up to a 52.8%
latency overhead on serving OPT-30B, a 36.2% throughput
drop on fine-tuning OPT-30B, and an 88.2% throughput drop
on serving OPT-66B (§3). This overhead is largely due to
a combination of memory swapping plus encryption. The
swapping happens because LLMs consume a huge amount
of GPU memory. For example, the OPT-66B model needs
approximately 132GB of memory to store all its parameters, surpassing the 80GB memory of H100 GPUs. Moreover,
runtime states such as the Key-Value cache (KV cache) [38]
during LLM inferences and activation during LLM training
also consume significant GPU memory.
Owing to the limited GPU memory, a GPU enclave has to
dynamically swap out inactive parameters and/or runtime
states to the main memory. This process requires encrypting
the data transferred out of the GPU enclave. Correspondingly, the CPU cores must decrypt data received from the
GPU, and re-encrypt it before sending it back to the GPU
(§2.2). However, the encryption and decryption pose a severe bottleneck due to the limited computational capability.
This bottleneck significantly harms the overall performance,
particularly in the context of LLMs.

This paper introduces PipeLLM, a system designed to eliminate the performance overhead associated with GPU confidential computing for LLMs. Importantly, PipeLLM achieves
this without requiring any changes to the existing LLM systems or the hardware, while still upholding the same level
of security. The underlying principle of PipeLLM is straightforward yet effective: it decouples encryption tasks from the
critical path of the memory swapping mechanism, by leveraging speculative pipelined encryption (§4.3), a technique we
proposed. Drawing inspiration from the concept of speculative execution in CPUs, PipeLLM anticipates which data
blocks will be required by the GPU and pre-encrypts them.
By doing so, PipeLLM significantly reduces the overhead of
the GPU confidential computing by integrating predictions,
encryptions, and data transfers into a pipeline.
However, akin to CPU pipelining, an incorrect prediction could not only waste an individual pre-encrypted data
but also invalidate the entire pipeline of subsequent preencrypted data. This is a consequence of the encryption
scheme used by GPU enclaves, designed to prevent replay
attacks [34]. In the H100’s confidential computing, data is
encrypted using a private key in conjunction with a unique
integer known as the Initialization Vector (IV). The IV is synchronized between the CPU and GPU, and increments by one
with each encryption. Consequently, if an incorrect piece
of data is encrypted in a pipeline, all subsequent IVs in the
pipeline could become invalid, requiring re-encryption of
the subsequent data with the correct IVs. We will elaborate
on the encryption mechanism and IVs in §5.3.
To address the challenge, we observe that LLM systems
are highly predictable in swapping, allowing PipeLLM to
accurately determine the sequence of data being swapped
using heuristics. For instance, FlexGen [42] and PEFT [31]
compute the LLM through a layer-by-layer process, enabling
PipeLLM to efficiently swap in layer parameters in their
respective order. Similarly, vLLM [25] uses simple swapping
policies like FIFO (First-In, First-Out) and LIFO (Last-In, FirstOut). PipeLLM can recognize these swapping policies and
use them to predict the future swapping sequence.
Moreover, PipeLLM incorporates several techniques to
accelerate the pipeline and mitigate the cost of prediction errors. First, PipeLLM develops an efficient validation scheme
to verify the correctness of a pre-defined ciphertext (§5.2).
Second, PipeLLM introduces request re-ordering and NOP
padding to handle IV mismatches without relinquishing the
entire pipeline (§5.3). Finally, PipeLLM provides asynchronous decryption to accelerate data transfer (§5.4).
We implement PipeLLM with approximately 1K lines of
code in C++. We conducted our performance experiments on
an Intel server equipped with an NVIDIA H100-SXM GPU.
The evaluation results show that PipeLLM significantly reduces the overhead associated with GPU confidential computing for LLM serving and fine-tuning, cutting it from as

much as 88.2% to <19.6% in throughput, across various LLM
sizes, ranging from 13 billion to 175 billion parameters.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We conduct a comprehensive performance analysis of
NVIDIA Confidential Computing on an H100 GPU enclave with LLM workloads.
• We propose speculative pipelined encryption, an approach
to greatly reduce the swapping overhead of confidential
computing. It works well for LLM serving and fine-tuning.
• We have built a system PipeLLM and evaluated its performance on multiple state-of-the-art LLM systems.

2

Background

2.1

Large Language Models (LLMs)

LLMs are language models that take a sequence of text as
input and produce a corresponding sequence of text as output. The Transformer architecture [49] is the predominant
framework in LLM design, used by well-known models like
GPT [7], OPT [52], and LLaMA [48]. An LLM typically consists of an input embedding layer, numerous transformer
layers, and an output embedding layer.
The inference process of LLMs begins with a prompt (a
series of tokens). Outputs are generated iteratively, with
each iteration processing the sequence through all layers to
produce the next token. This iterative process, known as autoregressive generation, continues until an end-of-sequence
token is produced or the output length reaches a threshold.
Training an LLM from scratch is very expensive [43]. Instead, fine-tuning [16] a pre-trained LLM is a more viable
option for many because fine-tuning requires far fewer resources and less time. This paper aims at serving and finetuning LLMs with fast confidential computing.
KV cache in LLM. In LLM inference, the attention mechanism captures the relationship between the current input token and preceding tokens by calculating their context as key
and value vectors. Storing these vectors in a KV cache [38]
allows LLMs to save repetitive calculations, significantly
boosting inference efficiency. However, this efficiency comes
at the cost of increased GPU memory consumption.
Memory pressure in LLMs. The size of LLMs has been
rapidly increasing, outpacing the growth in GPU memory
capacity. This disparity has made limited GPU memory a
significant bottleneck for serving and fine-tuning LLMs. The
memory pressure associated with LLMs originates from three
primary sources. First, both the inference and fine-tuning
of LLMs require the entire set of parameters for computation, and the model weights may exceed the GPU’s available
memory capacity. Second, for serving LLMs, KV cache consumes a lot of memory, for example, vLLM allocates about
30% of GPU memory for KV cache [25]. Third, activation and
optimizer states during fine-tuning are memory-intensive.
The size of the activation state is proportional to the batch
2

size, input length, and model hidden size, while the optimizer
state size depends on the number of trainable parameters.

CPU
IV = 3

GPU memory swapping. To mitigate the LLM memory
pressure, previous studies have introduced various GPU
swapping techniques. FlexGen [42] only loads the parameters of the active layer onto the GPU, while maintaining
the parameters of other layers in CPU memory. vLLM [25]
addresses memory shortages by pausing some running requests, swapping their KV cache to main memory, and later
loading back the vectors to resume processing these requests.
Deepspeed [39] facilitates optimizer offloading and model
offloading to free up memory, enabling larger batch sizes and
higher throughput in pre-training and fine-tuning LLMs.
2.2

GPU
IV = 7

Decrypt
Encrypt
Decrypt

c

a

b

a

b

Encrypt

c

d

d

CVM shared memory
a = AES(keyCPU, IV=1,

)

b = AES(keyCPU, IV=2,

)

c = AES(keyGPU, IV=5,

)

d = AES(keyGPU, IV=6,

)

Figure 1: Workflow of encrypted data transfer in NVIDIA
CC. The messages labeled “a” and “b” represent two consecutive
ciphertexts transferred from the CPU to the GPU, while “c” and “d”
denote ciphertexts moved from the GPU back to the CPU. After the
transfers, the current IV of CPU and GPU is 3 and 7, respectively.

read/write GPU memory and modify the control flow. Hardware GPU confidential computing has low performance overhead and is backward-compatible with existing applications.
This paper focuses on studying hardware GPU confidential
computing.

Confidential Computing (CC)

Cloud computing is a fundamental component of today’s digital world. Confidential computing has emerged as a solution
for securely outsourcing computation to the cloud without
compromising security and privacy. Cloud providers like Microsoft Azure [4, 5] and Google Cloud [10] have introduced
confidential virtual machines (CVMs) as a key measure for
confidential computing. CVMs ensure robust isolation from
untrusted hypervisors, enhancing security and privacy with
minimal changes to existing cloud infrastructure.

A closer look at NVIDIA CC. Although CVMs encrypt
their memory, this encryption is separate from that used
by NVIDIA CC. NVIDIA CC ensures the confidentiality and
integrity of communication between a CVM and a GPU via
AES-GCM encryption [15]. A critical component of AESGCM is the Initialization Vector (IV), a unique, non-repeating
number (a nonce) required for each encryption session. As
we will show later (§4.1), managing IVs presents a significant
challenge.
Figure 1 illustrates the workflow of data transfers of the
NVIDIA CC. Consider the process of copying memory from
the CPU to the GPU; the reverse process follows a similar pattern. All CPU-side application data resides in the
CVM’s private encrypted memory. To transfer data from
the CPU to the GPU, the application invokes CUDA APIs
(e.g., cudaMemcpyAsync). The CUDA library detects that it is
operating in CC mode and encrypts the data using the AESGCM key and IV before sending it to the GPU. The encrypted
data is then copied to CVM shared memory, allowing the
GPU to perform DMA.
During data transfer, the IV is not explicitly sent. Instead,
the initial IV is synchronized during system initialization,
and both the CVM and GPU increment the IV after each
transfer. This design enables both sides to determine the current IV without additional synchronization. Once the GPU
receives the ciphertext, its copy engine—a piece of hardware—
decrypts the data and transfers the plaintext to GPU memory.
The entire workflow is handled by the CUDA library and the
GPU, requiring no modifications to the application code.

Confidential VMs (CVMs). A CVM, such as Intel TDX [18]
and AMD SEV-SNP [2], isolates the user’s OS (the guest) from
the hypervisor (the host) and secures the user’s code and data
without modifying applications. Additionally, CVMs encrypt
their memory to guarantee privacy. CVMs generally incur
minimal performance overhead, averaging around 4% [24].
I/O operations however may introduce significant performance overhead due to data copying and encryption [27].
Confidential Computing (CC) on GPUs. Beyond CPUbased CVMs, confidential computing on GPUs secures GPU
computations such as LLM serving and training. Soter [40],
designed for edge computing, uses CPU-side confidential
computing to eliminate the trust on GPU hardware. It employs parameter morphing to offload certain layers to GPUs,
ensuring model weights secrecy. However, Soter imposes
significant overhead (2× to 15×) on LLM inference tasks, as
non-associative layers like embedding must be processed on
CPUs. Alternatively, Honeycomb [29] introduces a trusted
software layer and static validation to block insecure GPU
commands, but this adds substantial performance overhead
due to extra runtime checks for indirect memory access,
heavily used in systems like vLLM [25].
Unlike software-based solutions, NVIDIA Confidential
Computing relies on hardware: NVIDIA H100 GPU is the
first commercial implementation with confidential computing capability [15]. Working with CVMs, H100 could build a
GPU enclave, allowing users to have exclusive control over
the GPU and rejecting any access from the host, such as

3

Analysis of LLMs on GPU Enclave

NVIDIA reports that compared with confidential computing disabled (CC-disabled), confidential computing enabled
GPUs have significant performance overhead on IO-intensive
workloads like ResNet50 training [15]. This is not surprising,
as all I/Os need to be encrypted, and the encryption is on
the critical path. On the contrary, LLM serving is supposed
3

I/O size
128KB 1MB

32MB

Latency (𝜇s)

CC-disabled
CC-enabled

1.43
14.93

1.17
22.809

1.19
162.5

1.43
5252.1

Throughput (GB/s)

CC-disabled
CC-enabled

–
–

27.16
3.32

48.2
5.82

55.31
5.83

32/128
256/32
Input/Output Token Length

(a) FlexGen

w/o CC

1

CC

0.5
0

0

2
4
6
8
Request Rate (req/s)

(b) vLLM

Throughput
(sequences/s)

w/o CC
CC

3
2
1
0

w/o CC
CC
OPT-30B
OPT-13B
Model

(c) PEFT

Figure 3: Confidential computing overhead study.

that supports serving large models whose sizes exceed the
GPU memory capacity. FlexGen prefers throughput over latency. We run an OPT-66B model, which requires 132GB of
memory, exceeding the 80GB GPU memory capacity of the
H100. Thus, FlexGen needs to partially offload the model to
CPU memory. We use two configurations: input length 32
with output length 128, and input length 256 with output
length 32. To study model offloading, we guarantee all KV
cache is stored in GPU memory to avoid KV cache swapping.
Other configuration parameters are tuned to have the largest
batch size for high throughput on the CC-disabled system.
Figure 3a shows the result. FlexGen’s throughput has
dropped by up to 88.2% when confidential computing is
enabled. Note that CC-enabled and CC-disabled GPUs have
the same IO; the difference is that the CC-disabled GPU does
not need to encrypt the data. Additionally, we measure that
FlexGen uses about 64GB/s PCIe bandwidth when CC is disabled; whereas with CC enabled, it only uses approximately
6 GB/s bandwidth, which is bottlenecked by encryption.
The above experiments show that serving large LLMs
that exceed available GPU memory imposes significant overhead when confidential computing is enabled. The primary
reason is the necessity for model offloading, which in turn
introduces significant IOs. This, in turn, results in heavy
encryptions, ultimately leading to high overhead.

Microbenchmark. Before evaluating the performance of
application workloads on NVIDIA Confidential Computing,
we conduct a microbenchmark to clarify the performance
overhead of I/O operations. This microbenchmark assesses
latency and throughput across different I/O sizes. We demonstrate memory copying from host to device, noting that the
performance of the reverse operation is similar.

32B

50
40
30
20
10
0

Norm Latency
(s/token)

Throughput
(tokens/s)

to be compute-intensive, and hence has light overhead. As
shown by NVIDIA, there is negligible overhead for serving
BERT[14] (a language model) on CC-enabled GPUs [15].
However, low-overhead serving or training is no longer
true in LLM era. Serving and fine-tuning LLMs is indeed
compute-intensive, but it is even more of a memory-intensive
workload. We have observed that CC-enabled GPUs with
80GB GPU memory can have up to an 88.2% serving throughput drop on OPT-66B model (Figure 3a), a 36.2% fine-tuning
throughput drop on OPT-30B model (Figure 3c), and a 52.8%
serving capability drop on OPT-30B model (Figure 3b). This
is due to the IO caused by memory swapping: GPUs need
to swap in and out memory for large LLM inference and
fine-tuning. We observe that there are two major reasons for
swapping: (1) model offloading and (2) KV cache swapping.
In this section, we dive into the details of the two reasons
with three state-of-the-art systems, FlexGen [42], PEFT [31]
and vLLM [25].

Figure 2: Host To Device Memory Copy of Different Data Size

Case study 2: KV cache swapping. Beyond large LLMs
with model sizes exceeding GPU memory, we observe that
even when LLM models fit GPU memory, swapping still exists. This is due to intermediate data management: when
LLMs are deployed (like serving as chatbots) and interact
with the external world, the dynamic inputs, outputs, and
their intermediate data trigger memory swapping, in particular KV cache (§2.1).
To investigate the mid-sized LLM serving, we study vLLM,
the state-of-art inference system targeting low-latency LLM
serving. Unlike FlexGen, vLLM does not offload model weights;
instead, it swaps intermediate data to handle the memory
pressure caused by the dynamics of serving multiple requests.
vLLM targets low latency. We experiment vLLM with an
OPT-30B model (60GB). We configure vLLM with parallel
sampling, a common decoding policy, and ask vLLM to generate 6 output sequences for each input.
Figure 3b shows the latency changes when increasing request rates for CC-enabled and CC-disabled GPUs. When the
request rate is low, they have similar performance because
there is no memory pressure, and memory swapping rarely

Figure 2 shows the result. In the table, “Latency” measures
the time from the invocation to the return of the host-todevice CUDA API, while “Throughput” indicates the average throughput over 10K transfers. We have omitted the
throughputs for small data transfers (“32B”) because the
control-plane overhead is dominant in this case, and hence
both throughputs are tiny. Notably, the throughput of a CCenabled GPU is approximately an order of magnitude lower
than that of CC-disabled, limited by the CPU’s encryption
capability. Furthermore, the API latency for large packets
remains relatively constant in a CC-disabled CPU but increases proportionally in a CC-enabled GPU. This suggests
that encryption and decryption processes are coupled with
the API call.
Next, we examine three systems—FlexGen [42], vLLM [25],
and PEFT [31]—to further illustrate the bottleneck.
Case study 1: serving large LLMs with model offloading.
We first experiment with FlexGen and measure its throughputs. FlexGen is the state-of-the-art LLM inference system
4

happens. This also implies that the encryption overhead for
inputs and outputs is negligible. However, as the request rate
increases, the latency of the CC-enabled GPU grows significantly. This is due to the occurrence of intermediate data
swapping. Taking a closer look, we discover that the bottleneck primarily stems from memory “swapping in”: when the
GPU requests data, the CPU must encrypt the data before
sending it to the GPU. However, during the CPU encryption
phase, the GPU is idle due to the unavailability of the input.
These idle cycles affect the latency of the ongoing request
and other pending requests, thus exacerbating the overall
latency overhead.
From these experiments, we summarize that when handling multiple requests, serving even mid-sized LLMs with
CC-enabled GPUs imposes significant overhead. The main
cause of this overhead is the memory pressure caused by
the intermediate data (in particular, KV cache) of multiple
requests. Furthermore, we note that the main bottleneck is
the CPU encryption when “swapping in”.

and the host OS, but they cannot access the private memory protected by confidential VMs and CC-enabled GPUs.
Like confidential computing on CPUs [2, 19], NVIDIA Confidential Computing is susceptible to DOS attacks and side
channel attacks; PipeLLM shares the same limitation. In fact,
PipeLLM introduces new side channels, discussed in §8.1.
4.1

Main idea

As mentioned in §3, the bottleneck when serving and finetuning confidential LLMs is the encryption of memory swapping. Our main idea is to somehow remove the encryption out of the critical path of memory swapping. Note
that encryption is fundamental for security hence cannot
be avoided; it can only be hidden. Hiding computation by
pipelining is a well-established approach. We plan to pipeline
encryptions, data transfers, and GPU computation for better
performance. Figure below visualizes our main idea along
with a comparison to NVIDIA Confidential Computing. On
the left is an example of toy code; on the right is an illustration of how NVIDIA Confidential Computing and PipeLLM
execute it.

Case study 3: fine-tuning LLMs. Fine-tuning is a widely
used technique for customizing LLMs. In this experiment,
we aim to understand the performance bottlenecks of fineDecrypt
Encrypt
# 1. Swap from GPU
1t
# - PCIe transfer
tuning LLMs in a confidential computing environment. We
1c
3c
1c
# - CPU decryption
CPU
experiment with Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [31]
data = swap_from_gpu() NVIDIA
1t
3t
with DeepSpeed [39], to evaluate the overhead brought by
2
CC
#
2.
GPU
computation
2
GPU
the CC-enabled environment. Our experiments run LoRA [16]
Compute
llm.compute()
on OPT-30B and OPT-13B models, using the ultrachat dataset [30],
Time
# 3. Load back to GPU
1c
3c
with the maximum batch size to trigger memory swaps.
3c
# - CPU encryption
CPU
Figure 3c shows the result of PEFT. The throughput drop
3t
Saved
# - PCIe transfer
PipeLLM
1t
3t
2
load_back_to_gpu(data)
Time
brought by confidential computing is 36.2% on OPT-30B
GPU
Compute
model and 14.0% on OPT-13B model. The overhead is smaller
on OPT-13B because it contains fewer parameters than OPT30B and has lower memory pressure, requiring less I/O. OverFor transparency, NVIDIA Confidential Computing perall, the performance degradation stems from model offloadforms on-the-fly encryption and decryption (indicated by
ing, similar to FlexGen.
“1c” and “3c”) within its interface (e.g., cudaMemcpyAsync),

4

together with data transfer steps (“1t” and “3t”). PipeLLM
decouples and pipelines data transfer, encryption, and decryption to minimize GPU idle time. Note that GPU-side
encryption and decryption are not depicted.
A major challenge to realize PipeLLM’s pipelining is preencrypting data (i.e., the “3c”). PipeLLM must “predict” which
data the GPU will request and, crucially, the precise order
of these requests. This sequence is essential due to cryptographic requirements, which we elaborate on below.

Speculative Pipelined Encryption

In this section, we describe our main idea, the problem statement, and technical challenges to build our system, PipeLLM.
The primary goal of PipeLLM is to minimize the overhead
of NVIDIA Confidential Computing, while preserving its (1)
security guarantees and (2) user transparency. By user transparency, we mean that PipeLLM applies to non-modified
LLM applications, including LLM models, deep learning
frameworks, and any other supporting code and data. Next,
we elaborate on PipeLLM’s threat model.

Swapping sequence and IVs. NVIDIA Confidential Computing (H100) encrypts I/Os using AES-GCM, a stream cipher
that requires an Initialization Vector (IV) which is an integer. In this encryption scheme, each encryption needs three
pieces of inputs: (a) a piece of plaintext, (b) an encryption
key, and (c) a unique IV; the output is the ciphertext. It is
crucial that the IV for each encryption differs from the previous ones. In the H100 implementation, the CPU and the
GPU agree on a starting IV; for every following encryption,

Threat model. NVIDIA Confidential Computing aims at
protecting the confidentiality and integrity of applications
running on GPUs; for LLM applications, these are the model
weights and user request and response tokens. PipeLLM
shares the same threat model as NVIDIA Confidential Computing: attackers can have full control over the hypervisor
5

the IV is increased by 1 (IV is recorded in cyclic code in
NVIDIA Confidential Computing, but we use decimal numbers to describe IV in this paper for comprehensiveness). To
pipeline encryption and data transfer, one needs to somehow
guess the sequence of memory swapping a priori and pair
the sequence with the increasing IVs. Next, we define the
memory-copy prediction problem.
4.2

uses FIFO (First-In, First-Out) and LIFO (Least-In, First-Out)
to swap KV cache for different chunks. PipeLLM will predict
swaps by FIFO and LIFO accordingly.
With the above prediction, PipeLLM introduces speculative
pipelined encryption to predict a sequence of swapped memory chucks in the near future and pipeline the encryptions
and ciphertext transfers to hide the bottleneck. Furthermore,
PipeLLM develops a set of techniques to lower the penalty of
incorrect predictions. The speculative pipelined encryption
can be divided into three stages:
1. Prediction stage: in this stage, PipeLLM detects which GPU
memory belongs to model weights and KV cache without
looking into the application’s code. It further predicts the
sequence of memory chunks to be swapped, and encrypts
them with corresponding IVs.
2. Validation stage: at the moment of the application submitting the memory-copy commands, PipeLLM validates the
pre-encrypted data by checking if the data is correctly
encrypted (e.g., no update to the plaintext) and if using
the right IVs. If the check fails, PipeLLM goes to the errorhandling stage.
3. Error-handling stage: when the requested sequence is different from the predicted sequence, PipeLLM needs to
relinquish the current pipeline and start with the groundtruth sequence.

Problem Statement

For an LLM application, when swapping memory (e.g., model
weights and KV cache), the LLM system submits a sequence
of memory-copy commands (cudaMemcpyAsync); it then uses
a synchronization API (cudaDeviceSynchronize) to ensure
the data has been loaded into the GPU’s memory; finally, it
starts computation on the GPU. Note that other than memory swapping, there are memory-copies between CPUs and
GPUs for normal computations.
The problem to solve is to predict the next several memory
copies and their IVs, given the current IV and the execution
context. Since there is no modification to the LLM applications, only low-level memory-copy information is available.
We assume LLM models are known.
Predicting GPU memory copies in general is hard. For
serving and fine-tuning LLMs, we want to ignore normal
memory copies and only predict memory swaps because
(i) memory swaps contribute to the most of encrypted data
transfers and are the performance bottleneck (§3); (ii) the
swapped memory remains unchanged on CPU, hence can be
encrypted ahead of time without worrying the contents will
be modified; (iii) LLM inference and fine-tuning are highly
regular (§2.1); thus, accurately predicting memory swapping
sequence is possible.

Technical challenges. PipeLLM faces multiple technical
challenges. We list them below and address them in the next
section (§5). First, PipeLLM has no knowledge about highlevel semantics (e.g., which piece of data to swap), which
significantly helps predictions. However, getting them requires modification to the application and violates the usertransparency goal (§4). Therefore, PipeLLM has to make predictions based on limited low-level information, including
LLM features and API trace of applications.
Second, PipeLLM needs a computational and memory efficient validation. Validation checks whether the pre-encrypted
data aligns with what is requested. The challenge is how to
efficiently check if the data has been updated. Again, note
that PipeLLM has no information about whether the data is
read-only (e.g., swapped data) or read-write (e.g., data requiring CPU updates). One straightforward solution is to store (a)
the plaintext (that might be updated), (b) the pre-encrypted
ciphertext, and (c) the original plaintext associated with the
pre-encrypted ciphertext. By comparing (a) and (c), PipeLLM
will know if (b) is valid. It however requires data comparison
on the critical path, which increases runtime overhead. This
solution also triples the memory usage.
Third, PipeLLM needs to handle prediction errors efficiently. Pipeline relinquishing is expensive. On the one hand,
when encountering an error, the wanted data needs to be
encrypted on-the-fly, leading to high tail latency. On the
other hand, the encrypted data remaining in the pipeline

Observations. To predict memory swaps, we observe that
the sizes of LLM memory copies have the following patterns:
(1) the size of memory swapping (usually >128KB) is significantly larger than other data transfers (usually <8KB).
(2) we can distinguish model offloading and KV cache swapping by calculating their sizes ahead of time based on the
target LLMs. The two patterns allow us to accurately classify
memory copies. In addition, most of the transferred data is
memory swaps which are read-only. This enables an efficient
validation by leveraging page faults (we describe details below, §5.2). Finally, we observe that performing a “NOP” data
transfer (a 1-byte dummy) increments the current IV, with
low overhead. This implies that predicting a larger IV than
the ground truth has little penalty.
4.3

Speculative Pipelined Encryption

At a high level, PipeLLM’s prediction policy repeats the swapping patterns it has seen before, and predicts swaps with
slightly larger IVs as a leeway for compensating other data
transfers. For example, FlexGen almost always swaps transformer layers in order. So, when transferring layer 𝑖, PipeLLM
predicts and encrypts layer 𝑖 + 1. As another example, vLLM
6

Predict the swapping pattern
Training
LLM
Applications

History
1

Inference

3

4

1

History

Prediction
3

4

1

6

3

Time

Model
Offloading

Model
Offloading

KV Cache
Swapping

(a) Repetitive pattern

3

4

Prediction
1

1

4

3

6

Time

(b) LIFO (last-in-first-out)

Figure 5: Common patterns in LLM memory swapping.
Driver

Predictor
CUDA

PipeLLM
Validator

GPU

Error Handler

elaborate on these patterns below. However, PipeLLM’s predictor is general and can easily extend to other patterns. To
implement a new pattern, one needs to recognize the pattern from the history and write a prediction function given
the current swapping states. Our future work is to use ML
models to learn the predictor 𝑓 without human efforts.

CC Enabled H100

Figure 4: PipeLLM’s architecture. Yellow parts are PipeLLM.

cannot be used due to incorrect IVs, which requires another
round of encryption for all the subsequent data.

5

Current swapping patterns. In the following, we describe
several swapping patterns we observed in today’s LLM systems. For model offloading like FlexGen, it has a repetitive
pattern. Figure 5a gives an example. Each box represents
a layer, tagged by the layer number in the model (e.g, the
first layer is tagged by 1). Parameters from layer 1 are first
reloaded, followed by layers 3 and 4, and then back to layer
1. This pattern indicates that layers 1, 3, and 4 are offloaded.
Given that the most recent layer in the swap history is layer
1 (the final red block in the Figure 5a), PipeLLM predicts that
layer 3 will be the next to be reloaded and prepares it with
an appropriate IV for encryption. We observe that model offloading in most applications typically follows this repetitive
pattern. Since each layer in LLMs shares the same structure
and number of parameters, it is unlikely that applications
offload a particular layer in some iterations while retaining
it in the GPU during other iterations.
Another major swapping in LLMs is KV cache swapping,
typically conducted on a layer-wise or request-wise basis.
In layer-wise swapping, the application decides whether to
swap the KV cache generated in each layer for all requests
in the batch. Alternatively, request-wise approach involves
swapping all layers of KV cache from certain requests in case
of memory shortage to free up memory for others. Layerwise swapping aims to achieve high throughput as it allows
the batch size to remain unchanged; request-wise swapping
reduces latency for high-priority requests and lowers the
average latency overall.
In layer-wise swapping, applications swap out KV cache
of each layer in order, and then retrieve them in the same
order, thus the pattern is FIFO. In request-wise swapping,
applications usually swap out the lowest priority request in
the current batch when facing memory shortage. Therefore,
the first request to be swapped out is likely the one with the
lowest priority among the requests, and it will be the last to
be reloaded. So the swapped in pattern is LIFO, as depicted
in Figure 5b.

PipeLLM Design

PipeLLM architecture. We show the architecture of PipeLLM
in Figure 4. PipeLLM works on the library and driver level,
requiring no modification to user applications. PipeLLM consists of a predictor (§5.1), a validator (§5.2), and an error
handler (§5.3). The predictor produces the next sequence
of memory chunks to swap, based on the low-level information observed by PipeLLM; the validator checks if the
pre-encrypted data is valid before sending it to the GPU; the
error handler re-plans the pipeline when facing a prediction
error.
5.1

PipeLLM Predictor

PipeLLM’s predictor predicts which memory chucks to be
swapped in and the chunks’ corresponding IVs. In practice,
the swapping requests are in batch: a set of memory copy
operations (i.e., cudaMemcpyAsync) followed by a synchronization (i.e., cudaDeviceSynchronize). The LLM systems
such as FlexGen, vLLM, and PEFT need to maintain the order
between batches, without enforcing a specific order within
a batch.
The predictor takes in the following three inputs: (1) a
swapped-in batch history [𝐵 0, · · · , 𝐵𝑛 ], in which each 𝐵𝑖
contains a set of memory chucks {𝐶𝑝 , · · · , 𝐶𝑞 } and 𝐵𝑛 is the
most recent swapped-in batch; (2) the swapped out memory
blocks {𝐶𝑖 , · · · , 𝐶 𝑗 } on main memory which haven’t been
swapped into the GPU yet, and (3) the current Initialization
Vector (IV), 𝐼𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑟 . The predictor can be abstracted as a function 𝑓 that predicts the next swapped-in block 𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 and its
corresponding 𝐼𝑉𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 :
𝑓 ( [𝐵 0, · · · , 𝐵𝑛 ], {𝐶𝑖 , · · · , 𝐶 𝑗 }, 𝐼𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑟 ) → (𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 , 𝐼𝑉𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 )
So far, there is a limited number of swapping patterns in
today’s systems, including repetitive pattern (e.g., model
weights offloading), FIFO (e.g., layer-wise KV cache swapping), and LIFO (e.g., request-wise KV cache swapping). We
7

Targeting major memory swapping. The predictor focuses on major GPU memory swaps—model weights offloading and KV cache swapping. Other than the two, I/Os also
involve other small data transfers, for example, user input
and output tokens. As mentioned in §3, since the encryption of them bring negligible overheads, PipeLLM does not
pipeline them. By the model definition (i.e., its computational graph and weights), PipeLLM distinguishes the data
of model weights and KV cache with high accuracy without
additional hints from LLM applications. Therefore, PipeLLM
can distinguish the data of model weights and KV cache with
high accuracy without additional hints from LLM applications. Therefore, PipeLLM knows if a memory swap is model
offloading or KV cache swapping with high confidence.
Notably, those small data transfers would make the IV
increment. Since swapping and small I/O are intertwined
and interleaved in applications, PipeLLM would predict a
larger IV for swapping to handle IV increments by small I/O.
If predicted IV is larger, the ciphertext could still be utilized
for transfer, which would be explained in §5.3.
5.2

Prediction

IV=1

IV=2

IV=3

APP

IV=1

data1

IV=2

data2

PipeLLM

IV=3

data3

GPU

data3 data1
data1

sync
NOP

data3

Figure 6: Tolerate wrong IVs with re-ordering requests and
padding NOPs. In this figure, the current IV starts with 1, and the
application requests “data3” which is speculatively encrypted by
IV=3. Since IV=3 is greater than the current IV=1, PipeLLM suspends this request. The next request is “data1” which is encrypted
by IV=1, so PipeLLM sends “data1” and IV advances to 2. Finally,
by synchronization “sync”, PipeLLM sends a NOP to increase the
current IV=3, invalidates the incorrectly encrypted memory “data2”,
and commits the pending requests “data1” with IV=3.

5.3

Error Handler: Tolerating Wrong IVs with
Re-Ordering and NOP Padding

PipeLLM may incorrectly predict the swapped memory chunks,
their sequence, or their IVs. Some errors are “irrecoverable”:
for example, if the predicted IV is smaller than the current
IV, the pre-encrypted data must be discarded. In such cases,
PipeLLM’s error handler resets the pipeline by discarding the
speculative encrypted memory and restarting the process.
However, many errors are recoverable and can be corrected
with specific modifications to maintain pipeline integrity.
We introduce two approaches—swap re-ordering and NOP
padding—to address these errors. We experiment with various incorrect predictions in § 7.3.

Validator: Validating the Consistency of the
Ciphertext

The problem. As mentioned, PipeLLM speculatively encrypts memory chunks that haven’t been requested by the
GPU. The problem however is, how does PipeLLM know if
the original data has been updated when later requested? For
example, consider the case that an application transfers some
data from the GPU to the main memory, updates the memory
in-place, and then writes it back to the GPU. In this case,
this method could result in sending ciphertext of outdated
data when speculative encryption is performed before data
update by the application. Therefore, before sending ciphertext, PipeLLM must verify that the corresponding plaintext
matches the expected data.

Swap re-ordering. Swap re-ordering helps the case that
PipeLLM incorrectly predicts the order of memory blocks
within one batch. As mentioned in § 5.1, LLM applications
may batch multiple swap-in memory blocks, in which a
synchronization (e.g., cudadevicesynchronize) marks the
boundary of each batch. PipeLLM can re-order these speculative encrypted blocks within the batch, without having to
relinquish the pipeline.

Our method. PipeLLM’s validator uses an efficient approach
to validate the encrypted data. The validation works as follows. During the prediction stage, PipeLLM labels each preencrypted ciphertext with the corresponding plaintext’s address range on the CPU memory. PipeLLM then revokes the
write permission of these memory pages. Therefore, when
facing data modifications by the application, PipeLLM detects the changes by a page fault. The page protection can
thus prevent PipeLLM from violating the system’s correctness. During the validation stage at runtime, PipeLLM checks
if the address and length of the swap align with the associated
labels to determine the match between plaintext and ciphertext. This method is highly effective for LLMs because applications do not move or update the swapped model weights or
KV cache in the CPU memory. The pre-encrypted ciphertext
only involves large memory transfers which are typically
non-modified swaps. Therefore, page faults rarely occur and
thus bring little performance overhead.

Padding NOPs. A NOP is an operation to send a 1-byte
piece of data to increase the current IV. Padding NOPs is
useful when PipeLLM encrypts a data block with an IV that
is larger than it should be. For example, in Figure 6, “data3” is
speculatively encrypted using IV=3; however, current IV=2.
PipeLLM can forward IV by sending a NOP. In addition,
NOP padding enables PipeLLM to tolerate small-sized data
transfers (mentioned in §5.1) without restarting the pipeline.
5.4

Asynchronous Decryption

So far, our discussion has primarily focused on CPU-to-GPU
data transfers and CPU-side encryption. Regarding CPU-side
decryption during GPU-to-CPU data transfers, we observe
that by default, decryption is unnecessarily synchronous. In
particular, LLM applications do not alter swapped-out model
weights or KV cache. Based on this observation, PipeLLM
implements asynchronous decryption for swapped-out data.
8

The memory copy returns before decryption and leaves the
data at the destination address unmodified.
As a technicality, the async decryption works as follows.
PipeLLM determines whether the data being transferred is
part of the KV cache or model parameters based on their
feature on data size mentioned earlier. If yes, PipeLLM decrypts it asynchronously for better overlapping; otherwise,
PipeLLM does the default, decrypting the data immediately.
At misprediction, the applications may process the data before decryption. To detect usage-before-decryption, PipeLLM
revokes the read and write permissions of the application
for the plaintext which is a placeholder before decryption
finishes. If the application attempts to access (read or write)
this data, a page fault occurs. PipeLLM then decrypts the
data synchronously and allows the application to continue
its execution.

6

7

Evaluation

We answer the following questions in the evaluation section:
1. What degree of performance improvement does PipeLLM
bring to LLM inference and fine-tuning systems in confidential computing?
2. To what extent does the pipelining contribute to the
overall performance improvement?
3. Does PipeLLM’s performance rely on the high accuracy of predictions?
7.1

Evaluation Setup

Platform configurations. We setup a KVM VM on an Intel
server equipped with dual Intel Xeon Platinum 8462Y+ CPUs
at 4.10 GHz. This VM is configured with 16 virtual CPUs
(vCPUs) and 250GB of memory, running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
Additionally, a single H100-SXM GPU, connected via a PCIe
5.0 link capable of a maximum duplex bandwidth of 128GB/s,
is integrated into the server. This GPU is directly passed
through to the VM for dedicated use.

Implementation

Current CUDA uses a zero-copy technique for ciphertext in
CVM shared memory: for example, on host-to-device memory copy, the plaintext is stored in CVM private memory
before encryption; the encryption loads the plaintext and
directly writes the ciphertext in CVM shared memory. In
our design, employing a zero-copy technique could expose
uncommitted ciphertext, posing a potential security risk. To
mitigate this, our system (PipeLLM) stores the predicted ciphertext in CVM private memory and only transfers it to
shared memory after validating the prediction. Therefore,
unvalidated ciphertext is not exposed in CVM shared memory to attackers and the security is not compromised. To
eliminate the memory copy overhead, PipeLLM leverages
fix-sized buffers in shared memory for DMA to eliminate
memory allocation from the critical path and pipelines data
copy with PCIe transfer. Because memory copy is faster
than PCIe, the pipeline does not require much buffer for the
memory copy stage, minimizing the usage of CVM shared
memory.
We implement a prototype of PipeLLM as user-space runtime. We hack CUDA APIs related to CPU-GPU data transfer
(e.g., cudaMemcpyAsync) to implement the pipelining. Although CUDA implements the coupled memory copy API in
proprietary code, it calls OpenSSL APIs (EVP_EncryptUpdate)
encryption and decryption. PipeLLM also hacks those OpenSSL
APIs to decouple encryption or decryption from the memory copy API. To decouple encryption from host-to-device
copy, PipeLLM copies the pre-encrypted ciphertext to the
destination buffer provided by CUDA. For decryption, the
corresponding API called by CUDA would return without
performing the decryption. which is pipelined later. PipeLLM
uses MPK/PKU [20] to implement the read/write access revoke with little overhead, which can apply to Intel TDX and
AMD SEV-SNP. The core logic of PipeLLM consists of 958
lines of C++ code, with another about 600 lines of code for
hacking the APIs.

Workloads and metrics. We conducted experiments on
the cutting-edge inference systems, FlexGen [42], PEFT [31]
and vLLM [25], under confidential computing environment.
These LLM applications utilize model offloading and KV
cache swapping to address GPU memory shortage. FlexGen
is a leading LLM inference system renowned for its model
swapping capabilities in high-throughput scenarios. PEFT
is the state-of-the-art LLM training system with support of
LoRA fine-tuning and integration of DeepSpeed [39] model
offloading. vLLM, the state-of-the-art LLM inference system
in serving scenarios, uses KV cache swapping to handle the
GPU memory shortage. We utilize FlexGen to assess the
performance of model offloading, with synthetic datasets
to evaluate inference throughput. In each test case of FlexGen, 1000 requests are generated and we report the average
throughput. We run PEFT fine-tuning using ultrachat [30]
dataset for one epoch (about 6k sequences) and report the
training throughput. Additionally, we used vLLM to evaluate
performance in KV cache swapping, utilizing ShareGPT [47]
and Alpaca [46] to cover a range of request lengths. vLLM’s
focus is on serving, hence we evaluated normalized latency
across varying request rates to demonstrate its serving capabilities. In each test case of vLLM, 30-minute traces are used
to evaluate the systems.
Baselines. We conducted a comparative analysis of PipeLLM
against two baseline systems. The first baseline, referred to as
“w/o CC” (without Confidential Computing), represents the
native performance of inference systems, without the confidential computing feature. The second baseline, denoted as
“CC” (Confidential Computing), showcases the performance
of the current NVIDIA Confidential Computing framework
specifically applied in LLM inference.
9

32/128
256/32
Input/Output Token Length

(a) FlexGen OPT-66B

w/o CC
20
15
10
5
0

CC

PipeLLM

32/128
256/32
Input/Output Token Length

(b) FlexGen OPT-175B

Throughput
(sequences/s)

Throughput
(tokens/s)

40
30
20
10
0

Our evaluation focused on two models: OPT-30B and OPT13B. During these evaluations, we ensured that all model
weights for these models were stored in the GPU. Our experimental approach involved multiple configurations. We set
the parameter of parallel sampling to 2, 4, and 6, in consistency with the methodologies outlined in the original paper.
For vLLM, PipeLLM only uses one thread for encryption and
one thread for decryption.
Figure 8 provides a comprehensive analysis of PipeLLM’s
performance in handling KV cache swapping for the OPT30B model. The data reveals that confidential computing’s
encryption and decryption results in an overall performance
drop, ranging from 33.3% to 52.8%. PipeLLM reduces the overhead to 5.2% - 14.2%. Although the prediction success rate
is near 100%, PipeLLM is not able to reduce the overhead of
decreased throughput of data transfer (from 64GB/s to about
40GB/s) as well as the control-plane overhead of NVIDIA
Confidential Computing (as analyzed in §3).
The observed performance degradation of “CC” with the
OPT-13B model in ShareGPT dataset is 15.3% - 23.6%, and less
than 8% overhead in Alpaca dataset, notably lower than that
experienced with the OPT-30B model, owing to the distinct
memory usage characteristics of the two models. Specifically,
OPT-13B’s model weights occupy only about 26GB, which
is 32.5% of the GPU memory, in contrast to OPT-30B, which
utilizes a significantly larger portion, approximately 60GB or
75% of the GPU memory. However, PipeLLM can still reduce
the overhead to less than 8% in OPT-13B cases.

3
2
1
0

OPT-30B OPT-13B
Model

(c) PEFT

Figure 7: Performance of FlexGen and PEFT with model offloading.

7.2

End-to-End Performance

We demonstrate that PipeLLM effectively reduces overhead
in various swapping scenarios, encompassing model offloading and KV cache swapping. Remarkably, this reduction in
overhead is achieved without compromising security. Furthermore, the performance enhancements offered by PipeLLM
are not confined to a particular model or configuration; they
are broadly applicable, underscoring the system’s versatility
and effectiveness across different setups.
Model offloading. We conducted tests on model offloading
using FlexGen as inference cases and PEFT[31] as fine-tuning
cases. For FlexGen, our evaluation focused on two specific
models: OPT-66B and a 4-bit-quantized version of OPT-175B.
We use multiple configurations for running FlexGen. The
input token length was set to either 32 or 256, and the output
was set to either 128 or 32. For PEFT, OPT-30B and OPT-13B
are used for LoRA-based fine-tuning. The memory requirements of these models exceed the capacity of a single GPU.
To evaluate model offloading, we maintained the KV cache
and runtime temporary data on the GPU, limiting the offloaded data exclusively to model weights.
A key aspect to note is that the performance of model
offloading is bound by PCIe throughput. For example, the
peak swapping throughput of “w/o CC” in FlexGen is about
56GB/s. To maintain optimal performance, it is imperative
for PipeLLM to generate ciphertext at a speed that matches
or exceeds the swapping throughput. Therefore, PipeLLM
would utilize multiple CPU threads dedicated to encryption
and decryption to optimize model offloading.
Figure 7 presents the PipeLLM’s performance in running
FlexGen and PEFT in the context of model swapping with
various models and input configurations. Enabling confidential computing typically results in a substantial performance
decline, ranging from 82.8% to 88.2% in FlexGen, and up to
36.2% in PEFT.
PipeLLM successfully mitigates this performance degradation, reducing the overhead to less than 19.6%. It is a great
improvement and highlights the efficacy of PipeLLM in maintaining system performance even under the constraints of
confidential computing. The remaining overhead mainly
owes to 40GB/s maximum bandwidth of CPU-to-GPU memory copy even if all overhead of CPU-side encryption is
eliminated.

7.3

Analysis of Pipelining

PipeLLM introduces pipelining to enhance performance, utilizing multi-threading to boost encryption throughput. It
is important to note that “CC” can also use multiple CPU
threads to attain a line-rate encryption rate on the CPU,
thereby narrowing the performance gap. Our findings demonstrate that “CC” requires a greater number of threads compared to PipeLLM to achieve comparable performance.
We conducted the experiment using the vLLM with the
OPT-30B model. The dataset employed was Alpaca, and the
parallel size set for the experiment was 6. Figure 9 illustrates
the performance comparison between “CC”, utilizing four
threads for encryption and decryption, and the alternatives
’w/o CC’ and PipeLLM. Notably, PipeLLM only uses two
threads and yet outperforms “CC” with four threads but in
the absence of pipelining. This highlights the effectiveness
of pipelining in this context.
7.4

Ablation Study on Success Rate

PipeLLM achieves near 100% success rate on KV cache swapping in vLLM, because vLLM takes LIFO as its swap policy,
bringing benefit to PipeLLM. To show that PipeLLM works
well on inference systems with other swap policies on KV
cache, we conduct experiments on prediction failure on the
sequence.

KV cache swapping. We conducted tests with vLLM, the
state-of-the-art LLM inference system in serving scenarios.
10

Norm Latency
(s/token)

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

0

w/o CC

PipeLLM

1
0.5
0

0

4
8
Request Rate (req/s)

Request Rate (req/s)

(a) Alpaca parallel size = 2
Norm Latency
(s/token)

CC

12

(b) Alpaca parallel size = 4
1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

1

1.5

2

0

0

0.3

Request Rate (req/s)

(d) ShareGPT parallel size = 2

0.6

0.9

4

6

8

(c) Alpaca parallel size = 6

1

0

2

Request Rate (req/s)

1

0

0

1.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Request Rate (req/s)

Request Rate (req/s)

(e) ShareGPT parallel size = 4

(f) ShareGPT parallel size = 6

0.8

Figure 8: Performance on vLLM OPT-30B model with KV cache swapping.

(s/token)

Norm Latency

1
0.5
0

by CVM hardware. Importantly, in PipeLLM’s design, no
cryptographic data is transferred to shared memory until
a prediction is verified. Additionally, the padding NOPs described in §5.3 contain dummy data, preventing leakage of
information to attackers. Consequently, the ciphertext of
any mispredicted transfer does not compromise the security
guarantees of NVIDIA Confidential Computing.
Although PipeLLM does not compromise confidentiality
or integrity, its mis-speculation introduces side channels in
NOP transfers compared to NVIDIA Confidential Computing, including (1) attackers can detect if the LLM system is
currently swapping by observing NOPs, and (2) attackers
could profile the frequency of prediction failures, potentially
revealing the swapping patterns of applications. The security
implications of these side channels remain unclear and need
further research.

w/o CC
CC
CC-4t
PipeLLM
0

2
4
6
Request Rate (req/s)

8

Figure 9: Performance of trivial multi threading on vLLM
OPT-30B. “CC-4t” refers to the system using 4 threads for encryption and decryption without pipelining.

(s/token)

Norm Latency

1

w/o CC
CC
PipeLLM
PipeLLM-0

0.5
0

0

5

10
15
20
Request Rate (req/s)

25

8.2

Figure 10: Ablation study on success rate. “PipeLLM-0” refers
to the system with zero success rate on sequence prediction.

As discussed in §3, the primary overhead of NVIDIA Confidential Computing in LLM workloads arises from encrypting swap data. Observing that applications on the CPU do
not modify this data, one possible approach is to retain the
encrypted version on the CPU. This would allow the encrypted data to be transferred directly to the GPU during
loading, thereby eliminating encryption overhead. While this
approach improves performance, implementing it naively
compromises security guarantees. For example, reusing encrypted data enables attackers to identify data that matches
a previous transfer; more critically, it could make the system
vulnerable to replay attacks [35].
Currently, NVIDIA Confidential Computing uses the AESGCM algorithm with incrementing IVs to prevent ciphertext
reuse and defend against replay attacks (§ 2.2). This approach
prioritizes simplicity and transparency at the cost of performance: it encrypts read-only data on-the-fly, incurring some
overheads, but it requires no modifications to applications

We use vLLM with the OPT-30B model, Alpaca dataset,
and a parallel size of 2 as an example. Figure 10 shows that
the performance of PipeLLM with zero prediction success
rate only slightly drops by 8.3%, mainly caused by the overhead of NOPs. Upon sequence prediction failure, PipeLLM
can still use the ready ciphertext and use NOP to drop the
mispredicted ciphertext. The additional encryption latency
is well hidden with GPU computation.

8

Discussion

8.1

Security Analysis

Should Swap Data Be Re-encrypted?

PipeLLM preserves the confidentiality and integrity features of NVIDIA Confidential Computing. The MPK/PKU
mechanism used for validating predictions in PipeLLM operates within the guest VM and is secured from attackers
11

or encryption engines. PipeLLM follows this design choice,
providing practical performance benefits while preserving
transparency for users.
However, this design is a trade-off rather than a fundamental limitation. Future confidential GPUs could benefit
from dedicated hardware and library interfaces to support
ciphertext reuse for swap data, potentially alleviating the
bottlenecks faced by today’s CC-enabled LLM systems.
8.3

PipeLLM for the NVIDIA H100 GPU, the design considerations are equally applicable to other GPU enclaves.
GPU Attacks. Several studies have scrutinized the exploitation of security vulnerabilities to compromise GPU isolation.
A notable vulnerability involves the potential breach of GPU
security, allowing for the execution of GPU-based malware.
This malware can circumvent IOMMU protections and illicitly access private information from the host CPU [55].
Another common avenue of attack targets residual memory
contents left on the GPU from previous computations. For
instance, Lee et al.[26] demonstrated methods of extracting
sensitive webpage data retained in GPU memory, particularly from Chromium and Firefox browsers. Similarly, CUDA
Leaks[37] revealed the possibility of extracting sensitive information, including plaintext and encryption keys, from the
GPU’s shared and global memory.

Compared with TEE I/O Approach

The overhead of CC-enabled LLMs could also by mitigated
by hardware encryption. The next generation of CVM introduces TEE I/O [21], equipped with dedicated hardware on
CPU SOC for line-rate encryption. However, limited performance information is currently available. In practice, a GPU
server typically runs multiple VMs—a standard H100 server,
for example, has two CPUs (dual-socket) and eight GPUs—
raising questions about whether the TEE I/O hardware can
sustain GPUs’ throughputs. Compared to hardware solutions,
PipeLLM offers greater flexibility for different hardware configurations.

9

LLM-Specific Optimizations. Extensive research has been
conducted to enhance the performance of LLM without CC,
such as operator-level optimizations [11, 12], efficient memory management on GPU [25, 41], and optimizations based
on sparsity [44, 45, 51]. PipeLLM is orthogonal to these optimizations if running within CC.

Related Work

10

Enclaves that target CPU Various commercial products
have been released to provide CPU enclaves for protecting
user data and code from untrusted operating systems and
hypervisors. An enclave has isolated CPU states and memory region protected by the hardware, so that the CPU and
memory data cannot be directly accessed by the privileged
software. Intel SGX [6] is the first enclave implementation
that provides a process-level enclave, which mandates the
application to be modified to use the SGX interface.
The CVM abstraction, including AMD SEV [1, 2], Intel
TDX [17, 19] and ARM CCA [3], enables a more applicationtransparent approach by running the user workloads in VM
user mode without modifications [8, 9, 27, 28, 32]. However,
for the machine learning workloads, especially LLMs, these
CPU-side enclaves should be combined with GPU-side enclave to provide end-to-end protection for them.

Conclusion

This paper comprehensively evaluates and analyzes the performance overhead when serving and fine-tuning LLMs on
CVM equipped with a GPU enclave. This paper introduces
PipeLLM, a user-transparent runtime system that effectively
reduces the performance overhead associated with GPUbased confidential computing. PipeLLM uses speculative
pipelined encryption to overlap encryption and data transmission, thereby significantly minimizing latency. Our performance evaluations with real-world LLM systems, vLLM,
PEFT, and FlexGen, demonstrate that PipeLLM can reduce
overhead to <19.6% across various LLM sizes.

Acknowledgments
We express our sincere gratitude to our shepherd Kiwan
Maeng, and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments. This work was partially supported by NSFC (No.
62372287 and 61925206). Cheng Tan is supported in part by
NSF CAREER Awards #2237295. Zeyu Mi (yzmizeyu@sjtu.edu.cn)
is the corresponding author.

GPU Enclave In addition to software-based GPU enclaves,
researchers have also explored hardware-based approaches.
Graviton [50] represents the pioneering effort in creating a
GPU enclave, achieved by modifying the GPU’s command
processor and using data encryption to safeguard data confidentiality. HIX [22], without altering GPU hardware, proposes modest extensions to the I/O interconnect and the
memory management unit (MMU) to secure GPU computations. Another innovative approach, HETEE [54], leverages PCIe switch fabric to control access to GPUs securely
and flexibly without necessitating hardware modifications.
StrongBox [13] introduces an integrated-GPU enclave for
ARM devices, utilizing the pre-existing TrustZone features.
Although this paper focuses specifically on the design of

References
[1] AMD.
Protecting VM Register State With SEV-ES.
https:
//www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/Protecting%20VM%
20Register%20State%20with%20SEV-ES.pdf, 2017.
[2] AMD. AMD SEV-SNP: Strengthening VM Isolation with Integrity Protection and More. https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEVSNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-andmore.pdf, 2020.
[3] ARM.
ARM Confidential Compute Architecture.
https:
//www.arm.com/architecture/security-features/arm-confidentialcompute-architecture, 2023.
12

[21] Intel. Intel® TDX Connect Architecture Specification. https://cdrdv2.
intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/773614, 2023.
[22] Insu Jang, Adrian Tang, Taehoon Kim, Simha Sethumadhavan, and
Jaehyuk Huh. Heterogeneous isolated execution for commodity gpus.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
ASPLOS ’19, page 455–468, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[23] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch,
Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las
Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia
Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mixtral
of experts, 2024.
[24] David Kaplan. Hardware vm isolation in the cloud. Commun. ACM,
67(1):54–59, dec 2023.
[25] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
Efficient memory management for large language model serving with
pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, SOSP ’23, page 611–626, New York, NY, USA, 2023.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[26] Sangho Lee, Youngsok Kim, Jangwoo Kim, and Jong Kim. Stealing
webpages rendered on your browser by exploiting gpu vulnerabilities.
In 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 19–33, 2014.
[27] Dingji Li, Zeyu Mi, Chenhui Ji, Yifan Tan, Binyu Zang, Haibing Guan,
and Haibo Chen. Bifrost: Analysis and optimization of network I/O
tax in confidential virtual machines. In 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 23), pages 1–15, Boston, MA, July 2023.
USENIX Association.
[28] Dingji Li, Zeyu Mi, Yubin Xia, Binyu Zang, Haibo Chen, and Haibing
Guan. Twinvisor: Hardware-isolated confidential virtual machines for
arm. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, SOSP ’21, page 638–654, New York, NY, USA, 2021.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[29] HaoHui Mai, Jiacheng Zhao, Hongren Zheng, Yiyang Zhao, Zibin Liu,
Mingyu Gao, Cong Wang, Huimin Cui, Xiaobing Feng, and Christos
Kozyrakis. Honeycomb: Secure and efficient GPU executions via static
validation. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 23), pages 155–172, Boston, MA, July 2023.
USENIX Association.
[30] Sourab Mangrulkar. ultrachat-10k-chatml. https://huggingface.co/
datasets/smangrul/ultrachat-10k-chatml, 2024.
[31] Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada,
Sayak Paul, and Benjamin Bossan. Peft: State-of-the-art parameterefficient fine-tuning methods. https://github.com/huggingface/peft,
2022.
[32] Zeyu Mi, Dingji Li, Haibo Chen, Binyu Zang, and Haibing Guan.
(mostly) exitless VM protection from untrusted hypervisor through
disaggregated nested virtualization. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), pages 1695–1712. USENIX Association,
August 2020.
[33] Microsoft. Microsoft Copilot: Your everyday AI companion. https:
//copilot.microsoft.com/, 2024.
[34] NVIDIA. Benefits of NVIDIA Hopper H100 Confidential Computing
for trustworthy AI. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/confidentialcomputing-on-h100-gpus-for-secure-and-trustworthy-ai/, 2023.
[35] NVIDIA.
Confidential Compute on NVIDIA Hopper H100.
https://images.nvidia.com/aem-dam/en-zz/Solutions/datacenter/HCC-Whitepaper-v1.0.pdf, 2023.
[36] NVIDIA. NVIDIA Confidential Computing. https://www.nvidia.com/
en-us/data-center/solutions/confidential-computing/, 2024.

[4] Microsoft Azure. Announcing Azure confidential VMs with NVIDIA
H100 Tensor Core GPUs in Preview. https://aka.ms/cvm-h100-preview,
2023.
[5] Microsoft Azure. Azure confidential computing. https://azure.
microsoft.com/en-us/solutions/confidential-compute/, 2024.
[6] Andrew Baumann, Marcus Peinado, and Galen Hunt. Shielding Applications from an Untrusted Cloud with Haven. In Proceedings of the
11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 14), pages 267–283, Broomfield, CO, October 2014. USENIX
Association.
[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark,
Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[8] Jiahao Chen, Dingji Li, Zeyu Mi, Yuxuan Liu, Binyu Zang, Haibing
Guan, and Haibo Chen. Security and performance in the delegated
user-level virtualization. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23), pages 209–226, Boston,
MA, July 2023. USENIX Association.
[9] Jiahao Chen, Zeyu Mi, Yubin Xia, Haibing Guan, and Haibo Chen. CPC:
Flexible, secure, and efficient CVM maintenance with confidential procedure calls. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
24), pages 1065–1082, Santa Clara, CA, July 2024. USENIX Association.
[10] Google Cloud.
Oh SNP! VMs get even more confidential. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/rsasnp-vm-more-confidential, 2024.
[11] Tri Dao. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and
work partitioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08691, 2023.
[12] Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with ioawareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:16344–16359, 2022.
[13] Yunjie Deng, Chenxu Wang, Shunchang Yu, Shiqing Liu, Zhenyu Ning,
Kevin Leach, Jin Li, Shoumeng Yan, Zhengyu He, Jiannong Cao, and
Fengwei Zhang. Strongbox: A gpu tee on arm endpoints. In Proceedings
of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, CCS ’22, page 769–783, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[14] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[15] Gobikrishna Dhanuskodi, Sudeshna Guha, Vidhya Krishnan, Aruna
Manjunatha, Rob Nertney, Michael O’Connor, and Phil Rogers. Creating the first confidential gpus. Commun. ACM, dec 2023.
[16] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi
Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2022.
[17] Intel.
Intel TDX® Module v1.5 Base Architecture Specification. https://www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/us/en/
documents/intel-tdx-module-1.5-base-spec-348549001.pdf, 2022.
[18] Intel.
Intel® Trust Domain Extension (Intel® TDX) Module. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/738875/
intel-trust-domain-extension-intel-tdx-module.html, 2022.
[19] Intel. Intel® Trust Domain Extensions. https://www.intel.com/content/
dam/develop/external/us/en/documents/tdx-whitepaper-v4.pdf, 2022.
[20] Intel. Intel software developer’s manual. https://cdrdv2-public.intel.
com/812392/325462-sdm-vol-1-2abcd-3abcd-4.pdf, 2023.
13

[37] Roberto Di Pietro, Flavio Lombardi, and Antonio Villani. Cuda leaks: A
detailed hack for cuda and a (partial) fix. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput.
Syst., 15(1), jan 2016.
[38] Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin,
James Bradbury, Anselm Levskaya, Jonathan Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani
Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling transformer inference, 2022.
[39] Jie Ren, Samyam Rajbhandari, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Olatunji
Ruwase, Shuangyan Yang, Minjia Zhang, Dong Li, and Yuxiong He.
ZeRO-Offload: Democratizing Billion-Scale model training. In 2021
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21), pages 551–564.
USENIX Association, July 2021.
[40] Tianxiang Shen, Ji Qi, Jianyu Jiang, Xian Wang, Siyuan Wen, Xusheng
Chen, Shixiong Zhao, Sen Wang, Li Chen, Xiapu Luo, Fengwei Zhang,
and Heming Cui. SOTER: Guarding black-box inference for general
neural networks at the edge. In 2022 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 22), pages 723–738, Carlsbad, CA, July 2022. USENIX
Association.
[41] Ying Sheng, Shiyi Cao, Dacheng Li, Coleman Hooper, Nicholas Lee,
Shuo Yang, Christopher Chou, Banghua Zhu, Lianmin Zheng, Kurt
Keutzer, et al. Slora: Scalable serving of thousands of lora adapters.
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 6:296–311, 2024.
[42] Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max Ryabinin,
Beidi Chen, Percy Liang, Christopher Ré, Ion Stoica, and Ce Zhang.
Flexgen: High-throughput generative inference of large language models with a single gpu. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.
[43] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley,
Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multibillion parameter language models using model parallelism, 2020.
[44] Yixin Song, Zeyu Mi, Haotong Xie, and Haibo Chen. Powerinfer:
Fast large language model serving with a consumer-grade gpu. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.12456, 2023.
[45] Yixin Song, Haotong Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Bo Wen, Li Ma, Zeyu Mi,
and Haibo Chen. Turbo sparse: Achieving llm sota performance with
minimal activated parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05955, 2024.
[46] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li,
Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford
alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https://github.com/

tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
[47] ShareGPT Team. https://sharegpt.com, 2023.
[48] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, MarieAnne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric
Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
language models, 2023.
[49] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention
is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, page 6000–6010, Red
Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc.
[50] Stavros Volos, Kapil Vaswani, and Rodrigo Bruno. Graviton: Trusted
execution environments on GPUs. In 13th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18), pages 681–
696, Carlsbad, CA, October 2018. USENIX Association.
[51] Zhenliang Xue, Yixin Song, Zeyu Mi, Le Chen, Yubin Xia, and Haibo
Chen. Powerinfer-2: Fast large language model inference on a smartphone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06282, 2024.
[52] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen,
Shuohui Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria
Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel
Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models,
2022.
[53] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing,
Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-judge
with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.
[54] Jianping Zhu, Rui Hou, XiaoFeng Wang, Wenhao Wang, Jiangfeng
Cao, Boyan Zhao, Zhongpu Wang, Yuhui Zhang, Jiameng Ying, Lixin
Zhang, and Dan Meng. Enabling rack-scale confidential computing
using heterogeneous trusted execution environment. In 2020 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1450–1465, 2020.
[55] Zhiting Zhu, Sangman Kim, Yuri Rozhanski, Yige Hu, Emmett Witchel,
and Mark Silberstein. Understanding the security of discrete gpus. In
Proceedings of the General Purpose GPUs, GPGPU-10, page 1–11, New
York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.

14

