FMCC: Flexible Measurement-based Quantum
Computation over Cluster State
Yingheng Li

Aditya Pawar

Zewei Mo

yil392@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

adp110@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

zewei.mo@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

Youtao Zhang

Jun Yang

Xulong Tang

zhangyt@cs.pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

juy9@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

tax6@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
Measurement-based quantum computing (MBQC) is a promising quantum computing paradigm that performs computation through “one-way” measurements on entangled quantum qubits. It is widely used in photonic quantum computing
(PQC), where the computation is carried out on photonic
cluster states (i.e., a 2-D mesh of entangled photons). In
MBQC-based PQC, the cluster state depth (i.e., the length
of one-way measurements) plays an important role in the
overall execution time and circuit error. In this paper, we
propose FMCC, a compilation framework that employs dynamic programming with heuristics to efficiently minimize
the cluster state depth. Experimental results on six quantum applications show that FMCC achieves 51.7%, 57.4%,
and 56.8% average depth reductions in small, medium, and
large qubit counts compared to the state-of-the-art MBQC
compilations.
ACM Reference Format:
Yingheng Li, Aditya Pawar, Zewei Mo, Youtao Zhang, Jun Yang,
and Xulong Tang. 2024. FMCC: Flexible Measurement-based Quantum Computation over Cluster State. In 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1,
2024, La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674185

1

Introduction

Quantum computing has experienced rapid development in
the past decades, demonstrating its supremacy over classical
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674185

computers in various application fields [8, 20, 43]. Most quantum computing primarily focuses on matter-based quantum
computers that utilize superconducting [2] and trapped-ion
[9] qubits, following the gate-based quantum computation
paradigm. Recently, there has been a growing interest in
photonic quantum computing (PQC) that employs photon
qubits [7, 36, 44]. PQC generally leverages measurementbased quantum computation (MBQC) that carries out computation through “one-way” measurements on a 2-D mesh
of entangled photon qubits (known as cluster states) [7, 40].
Specifically, computation is conducted by measuring the
photons and propagating the measurement results through
a cluster state [7, 40, 41]. MBQC-based PQC offers several
advantages compared to gate-based quantum computation,
such as longer coherence times and better scalability [37].
In MBQC, a quantum algorithm is executed by mapping
the measurement patterns of each quantum gate onto a cluster state (detailed discussion in Section 2.1). A cluster state
is generated using cluster state generator hardware that
produces entangled photons with fixed cluster state width,
where the width is the number of rows of entangled photons in the 2-D mesh [7, 10, 15, 18, 27, 38, 40]. In MBQC,
the computation is realized by measurements to process and
transmit information between neighboring entangled photons. As such, the depth (i.e., the number of photon columns
to execute a quantum algorithm) is a metric that critically
affects the execution time and error of quantum algorithms.
In this paper, we observe that modern MBQC execution
on cluster states is not optimized for the cluster state depth,
resulting in a long depth that induces a large photon resource
cost [15, 18, 38] and increases quantum error rate [21, 44, 46].
To this end, we propose FMCC (Flexible MBQC Compilation
on Cluster State), an MBQC compilation framework that
achieves the minimized depth to execute quantum algorithms on a cluster state. Specifically, the motivation stems
from our observations that i) a significant amount of photons are wasted in cluster states during execution, and ii)
the MBQC execution allows different valid mapping “variants”. To generate different MBQC mapping variants that

