Nazar: Monitoring and Adapting ML Models on Mobile
Devices
Wei Hao

Zixi Wang

Lauren Hong

wh2473@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

zw2774@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

lauren.hong@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

Lingxiao Li

Nader Karayanni

AnMei Dasbach-Prisk∗

ll3504@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

nk3041@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

adasbachprisk@ucsd.edu
University of California San Diego
San Diego, USA

Chengzhi Mao

Junfeng Yang

Asaf Cidon

cm3797@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

junfeng@cs.columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

asaf.cidon@columbia.edu
Columbia University
New York, USA

Abstract

Keywords: Machine Learning System Design; Root Cause
Analysis; Drift Adaptation; Mobile Devices

ML models are increasingly run locally on mobile devices
for low-latency inference and offline operation. However, it
is hard for ML operators to track on-device model accuracy,
which can degrade unpredictably (e.g., due to local data drift).
We design Nazar, the first end-to-end system for continuously monitoring and adapting models on mobile devices
without requiring feedback from users. Our key observation
is that accuracy degradation is often due to a specific root
cause, which may affect a large group of devices. Once Nazar
detects a degradation affecting a large number of devices,
it automatically pinpoints the root causes and adapts the
model specifically to them. Evaluation on two computer vision datasets shows that Nazar consistently boosts accuracy
compared to existing approaches by up to 19.4%.

ACM Reference Format:
Wei Hao, Zixi Wang, Lauren Hong, Lingxiao Li, Nader Karayanni,
AnMei Dasbach-Prisk, Chengzhi Mao, Junfeng Yang, and Asaf
Cidon. 2025. Nazar: Monitoring and Adapting ML Models on Mobile
Devices. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707246

1

Introduction

Companies such as Google, Meta, Apple and LinkedIn, are increasingly running their ML models on users’ mobile devices,
so they can run inference locally at a low latency. Examples include text suggestion [9, 49], ranking posts, object
detection and tracking for virtual reality [66], speech recognition [43] and targeted advertising [64]. As state-of-the-art
ML models are very large, they are typically trained in the
datacenters with fleets of GPUs [47, 66]. A team of ML operators is usually responsible for retraining the models and
pushing new model versions to user mobile devices.
However, in large-scale settings, ML operators lack sufficient visibility into the performance of the models running
on users devices [54]. Model accuracy across devices is highly
variable over time due to unexpected shifts in the input data
(termed data drift) or hardware issues in specific devices
(e.g., low-quality cameras, microphones) [10, 47]. Although
ML operators may fine-tune or retrain models to improve
accuracy, it is quite difficult today to detect data drift in the
first place or verify whether accuracy has been restored properly after fine-tuning [18, 47, 54–56]. The crux is that after
the models are deployed, ML operators have no “ground

CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Anomaly
detection; Semi-supervised learning settings; • General
and reference → Design; • Software and its engineering
→ Software design engineering.
∗ Work done at Columbia University.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707246

746

