DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning
Applications in Noisy Cloud Environments
Rohan Basu Roy

Vijay Gadepally

Devesh Tiwari

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Lexington, MA, USA

Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA

arXiv:2509.25090v1 [cs.PF] 29 Sep 2025

Abstract
This work introduces a new subarea of performance tuning
– performance tuning in a shared interference-prone computing environment. We demonstrate that existing tuners are
significantly suboptimal by design because of their inability to account for interference during tuning. Our solution,
DarwinGame, employs a tournament-based design to systematically compare application executions with different tunable
parameter configurations, enabling it to identify the relative
performance of different tunable parameter configurations in
a noisy environment. Compared to existing solutions, DarwinGame achieves more than 27% reduction in execution time,
with less than 0.5% performance variability. DarwinGame is
the first performance tuner that will help developers tune their
applications in shared, interference-prone, cloud environments.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing.
Keywords: Performance Tuning, Performance Interference,
Tuning in Cloud
ACM Reference Format:
Rohan Basu Roy, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari. 2025. DarwinGame: Playing Tournaments for Tuning Applications in Noisy
Cloud Environments. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1

Introduction

Background. Tuning application-level and system-level configurable parameters to minimize application execution time,
has been long-studied and is widely accepted to be a challenging problem [11, 17, 31, 45, 46, 62, 73, 74, 76]. This is
because an application performance tuning requires navigating through a vast and often non-linear search space
of many application-level and system-level configurable
parameters. These tuning parameters interact with each
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

other, making the tuning process challenging and timeconsuming [54, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 82].
In response to this challenge, researchers and practitioners have innovated many performance tuners [11, 12, 14, 22,
53, 81, 85, 86]. However, all prior tuners implicitly assume
that the tuning process is performed in a dedicated computing environment without performance interference from
co-located applications. Unfortunately, users are increasingly
running their applications in shared environments including cloud computing platforms due to a variety of reasons
(briefly outlined below), and the inability to account for interference during tuning makes existing tuners suboptimal
(reasons briefly outlined below and quantified in Sec. 5).
Increasing needs and challenges of performance tuning in shared, interference-prone execution environments. The cloud computing platforms have experienced
dramatic adoption in the last decade [30, 79, 80]. Even when
organizations use on-premise clusters, possibly as a supplement to cloud computing, resources are often shared among
users to save operational costs, promote more efficient usage
of resources, and reduce queue wait time [1, 3, 4, 25, 70, 83].
There are various other reasons why application developers may increasingly use production cloud platforms to tune
their applications’ performance. For example, certain computing resources (e.g., a specific chip or AI accelerator) may
only be available on cloud computing platforms [61]. Production cloud provides a diverse range of resources and computing environments, that are available on-demand, avoiding
the need for significant upfront investments in dedicated
on-premise clusters [18, 29]. The end user may not be able to
afford dedicated on-premise resources and rather use pay-asyou-go renting of shared resources (on the cloud computing
platform) [9, 67]. Additionally, the application may be intended to be deployed on a cloud computing ecosystem and
hence, should be developed and performance-tuned on the
same platform type to ensure a particular configuration’s
sensitivity to interference is captured during tuning [42, 50].
Therefore, we need tuners that can be effective when applications are executed on interference-prone environments.
One intuitive solution is to use existing tuners in the
shared cloud environment and rely on its outcome. While
simple, our experiments reveal that existing tuners are significantly suboptimal (more than 40% far from optimal) when
used in shared, interference-prone execution environments
(Sec. 5). This is expected because existing tuners are not

