SuperNoVA: Algorithm-Hardware Co-Design for
Resource-Aware SLAM
Seah Kim

Roger Hsiao

Borivoje Nikolić

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
seah@berkeley.edu

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
roger_hsiao@berkeley.edu

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
bora@berkeley.edu

James Demmel

Yakun Sophia Shao

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
demmel@berkeley.edu

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
ysshao@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) plays a crucial role in robotics, autonomous systems, and augmented
and virtual reality (AR/VR) applications by enabling devices to understand and map unknown environments. However, deploying SLAM in AR/VR applications poses significant challenges, including the demand for high accuracy,
real-time processing, and efficient resource utilization, especially on compact and lightweight devices. To address these
challenges, we propose SuperNoVA, which enables highaccuracy, real-time, large-scale SLAM in resource-constrained
settings through a full-stack system, spanning from algorithm to hardware. In particular, SuperNoVA dynamically
constructs a subgraph to meet the latency target while preserving accuracy, virtualizes hardware resources for efficient
graph processing, and implements a novel hardware architecture to accelerate the SLAM backend efficiently. Evaluation
results demonstrate that, for a large-scale AR dataset, SuperNoVA reduces full SLAM backend computation latency by
89.5% compared to the baseline out-of-order CPU and 78.6%
compared to the baseline embedded GPU, and reduces the
maximum pose error by 89% over existing SLAM solutions,
while always meeting the latency target.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Real-time system architecture; Robotics; • Mathematics of computing → Probabilistic inference problems; •
Hardware → Application-specific VLSI designs; • Computing methodologies → Mixed / augmented reality.
Keywords: AR/VR, Robotics, SLAM, Accelerator, AlgorithmHardware Co-Design, Resource Management

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707258

ACM Reference Format:
Seah Kim, Roger Hsiao, Borivoje Nikolić, James Demmel, and Yakun
Sophia Shao. 2025. SuperNoVA: Algorithm-Hardware Co-Design for
Resource-Aware SLAM. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707258

1

Introduction

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a critical
workload in robotics [10, 48], autonomous systems [11, 49]
and AR/VR [23, 25, 46], enabling navigation and map construction of unknown environments in real-time. It involves
the integration of sensor data to concurrently estimate the
position and construct a map of its surroundings. Specifically, the demand for SLAM in AR/VR is driven by a diverse
range of applications, including gaming, architectural visualization, remote collaboration, and training simulations,
where the seamless integration of virtual content with the
real world is crucial for delivering compelling immersive
experiences. In these critical applications, the accuracy and
efficiency of SLAM algorithms are paramount to providing
spatial understanding and seamless tracking.
However, SLAM deployment is challenging in AR/VR applications due to several key constraints. First, seamlessly integrating virtual content into the physical world requires precise tracking of both user position and orientation. Achieving
high accuracy relies on processing large volumes of sensor
data and trajectories, which is computationally intensive.
Second, SLAM must operate in real-time to provide immediate feedback to the system and to match the strict sensor
input rate and frame update rate. Balancing real-time requirements while maintaining accuracy and efficiency is
a significant challenge. Third, physical device constraints,
such as stringent battery and form-factor constraints, impose
limitations on available on-device computational resources,
further adding to the challenge.
Existing SLAM solutions, both hardware and algorithms,
fall short of these requirements, suffering from either high

