arXiv:2412.01523v3 [cs.DC] 11 Feb 2025

FlexSP: Accelerating Large Language Model Training
via Flexible Sequence Parallelism
Yujie Wang∗

Shiju Wang

Shenhan Zhu∗

Peking University
Beijing, China
alfredwang@pku.edu.cn

Beihang University
Beijing, China
21373455@buaa.edu.cn

Peking University
Beijing, China
shenhan.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Fangcheng Fu∗

Xinyi Liu∗

Xuefeng Xiao

Peking University
Beijing, China
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn

Peking University
Beijing, China
xy.liu@stu.pku.edu.cn

ByteDance Inc.
Beijing, China
xiaoxuefeng.ailab@bytedance.com

Huixia Li

Jiashi Li

Faming Wu

ByteDance Inc.
Beijing, China
lihuixia@bytedance.com

ByteDance Inc.
Shenzhen, China
lijiashi@bytedance.com

ByteDance Inc.
Beijing, China
wufaming@bytedance.com

Bin Cui∗†
Peking University
Beijing, China
bin.cui@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Extending the context length (i.e., the maximum supported
sequence length) of LLMs is of paramount significance. To
facilitate long context training of LLMs, sequence parallelism
has emerged as an essential technique, which scatters each
input sequence across multiple devices and necessitates communication to process the sequence. In essence, existing sequence parallelism methods assume homogeneous sequence
lengths (i.e., all input sequences are equal in length) and
therefore leverages a single, static scattering strategy for all
input sequences. However, in reality, the sequence lengths
in LLM training corpora exhibit substantial variability, often
following a long-tail distribution, which leads to workload
heterogeneity.
In this paper, we show that employing a single, static strategy results in inefficiency and resource under-utilization,
highlighting the need for adaptive approaches to handle
the heterogeneous workloads across sequences. To address
this, we propose a heterogeneity-adaptive sequence parallelism method. For each training step, our approach captures
the variability in sequence lengths and assigns the optimal
combination of scattering strategies based on workload characteristics. We model this problem as a linear programming
optimization and design an efficient and effective solver to
find the optimal solution. Furthermore, we implement our

∗ School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence Software
Technologies (MOE), Peking University
† Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao)

method in a high-performance system that supports adaptive parallelization in distributed LLM training. Experimental
results demonstrate that our system outperforms state-ofthe-art training frameworks by up to 1.98×. Source code is
available at https://github.com/PKU-DAIR/Hetu-Galvatron.

1

Introduction

Large Transformer models [12, 26, 35, 40, 45], represented by
Large Language Models (LLMs) [3, 7, 36, 37, 42, 43, 49, 50, 54],
have made astonishing achievements in the field of artificial
intelligence (AI). Recently, there is an increasing need to
extend the context length of LLMs, which represents the
maximum supported sequence length of the LLMs [11, 15, 47].
Therefore, long-context LLM training has garnered extensive
attention from both the academia and industry [4, 6, 8, 24,
27, 29, 48].
It is well known that training LLMs with longer context
lengths demands increasingly more device (e.g., GPU) memory, and a promising paradigm is to parallelize the training
inputs over multiple devices. Particularly, sequence parallelism (SP) [6, 19, 22, 24, 27, 29] has emerged as a pivotal
technique for long-context LLM training. In a nutshell, SP
splits each training input in the sequence dimension and scatters different shards onto multiple devices to amortize the
memory consumption. In order to carry out the training, it
necessitates communication among the devices to exchange
the intermediate results during the forward and backward
propagation. By nature, if we wish to support longer training

