MOAT: Securely Mitigating Rowhammer
with Per-Row Activation Counters
Moinuddin Qureshi

Salman Qazi

moin@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

sqazi@google.com
Google
Mountain View, California, USA

Abstract

1

Rowhammer has worsened over the last decade. Existing
in-DRAM solutions, such as TRR, were broken with simple
patterns. In response, the DDR5 specifications have been extended to support Per-Row Activation Counting (PRAC), with
counters inlined with each row, and ALERT-Back-Off (ABO)
to stop the memory controller if the DRAM needs more time
to mitigate. Although PRAC+ABO represents a strong advance in Rowhammer protection, they are just a framework,
and the actual security is dependent on the implementation.
In this paper, we first show that a prior work, Panopticon
(which formed the basis for PRAC+ABO), is insecure, as our
Jailbreak pattern can cause 1150 activations on an attack row
for Panopticon configured for a threshold of 128. We then
propose MOAT, a provably secure design, which uses two internal thresholds: ETH, an Eligibility Threshold for mitigating
a row, and ATH, an ALERT Threshold for initiating an ABO.
As JEDEC specifications permit a few activations between
consecutive ALERTs, we also study how an attacker can exploit such activations to inflict more activations than ATH
on an attack row and thus increase the tolerated Rowhammer threshold. Our analysis shows that MOAT configured
with ATH=64 can safely tolerate a Rowhammer threshold
of 99. Finally, we also study performance attacks and denialof-service due to ALERTs. Our evaluations, with SPEC and
GAP workloads, show that MOAT with ATH=64 incurs an
average slowdown of 0.27% and 7 bytes of SRAM per bank.

Rowhammer occurs when rapid activations of a DRAM row
causes bit-flips in neighboring rows [24] and is a serious
security threat [2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 25, 38, 39]. Rowhammer has been
difficult to solve because the Rowhammer Threshold (𝑇𝑅𝐻 ),
which is the number of activations required to induce a bitflip, has continued to decrease with each DRAM generations,
reducing from 140K [24] to 4.8K [21] in the last decade.
Typical hardware-based mitigation for Rowhammer relies
on a tracking mechanism to identify the aggressor rows and
issue a refresh to the neighboring victim rows [11]. Such
mitigation can be deployed either at the Memory-Controller
(MC) or within the DRAM chip (in-DRAM). The in-DRAM
approach is appealing as it can solve the Rowhammer transparently within the DRAM without relying on other parts of
the system. In this paper, we focus on in-DRAM mitigations.

CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Security in
hardware.
Keywords: DRAM, Rowhammer, Security, PRAC, ABO, DOS
ACM Reference Format:
Moinuddin Qureshi and Salman Qazi. 2025. MOAT: Securely Mitigating Rowhammer with Per-Row Activation Counters. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25). , 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3669940.3707278
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707278

Introduction

The Space-Time Challenge: In-DRAM Rowhammer mitigation suffers from the two fundamental constraints of space
and time. First, the SRAM available for tracking aggressor
rows is quite small (few bytes per bank), so these trackers
cannot track all aggressor rows. For example, DDR4 devices
contain Targeted Row Refresh (TRR) tracker with 1-30 entries [11]. Second, the mitigation is performed transparently
during the refresh (REF) operation by borrowing time from
refresh. It is not possible for current DRAM chips to sometimes take longer to do REF if there are more aggressor rows,
as this would violate the deterministic timing guarantees of
DDR5. This means that it is not enough to track aggressor
rows, but we must spread the mitigation of aggressor rows
over many REF periods, as we cannot support bursty mitigations. Otherwise, an attacker could use feinting pattern [27]
to increase the activation counts of the aggressor rows.
Low-Cost Trackers Easily Broken: As low-cost trackers
cannot track all the aggressor rows, an attacker could craft a
pattern to make the tracker forget some of the aggressor rows.
For example, TRRespass [7] thrashes low-cost trackers with
a large number of aggressors, and the Blacksmith [14] causes
low-cost trackers to forget the aggressor rows using decoy
rows. Thus, the system remains vulnerable to Rowhammer
attacks even in the presence of such low-cost in-DRAM mitigations, as acknowledged by JEDEC [16, 17]. Ideally, we want
low SRAM overheads and strong security, see Figure 1(a).

