PipeLLM: Fast and Confidential Large Language Model
Services with Speculative Pipelined Encryption
To appear in ASPLOS 2025
Yifan Tan1,3 , Cheng Tan2 , Zeyu Mi1,3 , and Haibo Chen1,3

1 Institute of Parallel and Distributed Systems, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2 Northeastern University

arXiv:2411.03357v1 [cs.CR] 4 Nov 2024

3 Engineering Research Center for Domain-specific Operating Systems, Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Confidential computing on GPUs, like NVIDIA H100, mitigates the security risks of outsourced Large Language Models
(LLMs) by implementing strong isolation and data encryption. Nonetheless, this encryption incurs a significant performance overhead, reaching up to 52.8% and 88.2% throughput
drop when serving OPT-30B and OPT-66B, respectively.
To address this challenge, we introduce PipeLLM, a usertransparent runtime system. PipeLLM removes the overhead by overlapping the encryption and GPU computation
through pipelining—an idea inspired by the CPU instruction pipelining—thereby effectively concealing the latency
increase caused by encryption. The primary technical challenge is that, unlike CPUs, the encryption module lacks
prior knowledge of the specific data needing encryption
until it is requested by the GPUs. To this end, we propose
speculative pipelined encryption to predict the data requiring encryption by analyzing the serving patterns of LLMs.
Further, we have developed an efficient, low-cost pipeline
relinquishing approach for instances of incorrect predictions.
Our experiments on NVIDIA H100 GPU show that compared
with vanilla systems without confidential computing (e.g.,
vLLM, PEFT, and FlexGen), PipeLLM incurs modest overhead
(<19.6% in throughput) across various LLM sizes, from 13B
to 175B.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used across
various applications [33, 53]. With the growth of open-source
LLMs [23, 48, 52], companies are integrating and fine-tuning
these models into their business operations.
Due to LLM’s reliance on high-end GPUs, many businesses
opt for outsourced services, such as cloud, attracted by their
high availability and flexible pay-as-you-go models. However, these cloud infrastructures, often complex in nature,
encompass a large Trusted Computing Base (TCB), which
may contain vulnerabilities, both publicly reported and zeroday [8, 28]. This poses security risks for LLMs, which are
usually fine-tuned with proprietary data, and user prompts
that contain sensitive business information. Thus, any data
breach could expose critical business secrets.

To mitigate these security threats, people introduce confidential computing. Confidential computing is designed to
safeguard tenants’ code and data against untrusted privileged software and rogue employees of cloud providers. The
confidential virtual machine (CVM), supported by technologies such as Intel TDX [18], AMD SEV [2], and ARM CCA [3],
serves as a prime example of this. Any software external to
a CVM is unable to access the code and data within it.
Regarding machine learning workloads, people develop
GPU enclaves to enhance security measures within GPUs [36,
50]. A notable implementation of this is the NVIDIA H100
GPU [36], which supports confidential computing inside the
GPU to protect sensitive data and models from unauthorized
access. Moreover, the data communication between the CVM
and the GPU enclave is encrypted, further reinforcing the
security of I/O operations.
Although GPU confidential computing effectively enhances
security for traditional small-scale AI models, it significantly
undermines the performance of LLMs in throughput and
latency. Our comprehensive experiments on NVIDIA H100
GPUs reveal that the GPU enclave can incur up to a 52.8%
latency overhead on serving OPT-30B, a 36.2% throughput
drop on fine-tuning OPT-30B, and an 88.2% throughput drop
on serving OPT-66B (§3). This overhead is largely due to
a combination of memory swapping plus encryption. The
swapping happens because LLMs consume a huge amount
of GPU memory. For example, the OPT-66B model needs
approximately 132GB of memory to store all its parameters, surpassing the 80GB memory of H100 GPUs. Moreover,
runtime states such as the Key-Value cache (KV cache) [38]
during LLM inferences and activation during LLM training
also consume significant GPU memory.
Owing to the limited GPU memory, a GPU enclave has to
dynamically swap out inactive parameters and/or runtime
states to the main memory. This process requires encrypting
the data transferred out of the GPU enclave. Correspondingly, the CPU cores must decrypt data received from the
GPU, and re-encrypt it before sending it back to the GPU
(§2.2). However, the encryption and decryption pose a severe bottleneck due to the limited computational capability.
This bottleneck significantly harms the overall performance,
particularly in the context of LLMs.

