Optimizing Quantum Circuits, Fast and Slow
Amanda Xu

Abtin Molavi

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
axu44@wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
amolavi@wisc.edu

Swamit Tannu

Aws Albarghouthi

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
swamit@cs.wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
aws@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

GUOQ vs. State-of-the-Art Quantum Optimizers

Optimizing quantum circuits is critical: the number of quantum operations needs to be minimized for a successful evaluation of a circuit on a quantum processor. In this paper we
unify two disparate ideas for optimizing quantum circuits,
rewrite rules, which are fast standard optimizer passes, and
unitary synthesis, which is slow, requiring a search through
the space of circuits. We present a clean, unifying framework
for thinking of rewriting and resynthesis as abstract circuit
transformations. We then present a radically simple algorithm, guoq, for optimizing quantum circuits that exploits
the synergies of rewriting and resynthesis. Our extensive
evaluation demonstrates the ability of guoq to strongly outperform existing optimizers on a wide range of benchmarks.

GUOQ

1

94.3

Qiskit

GUOQ

87.9

TKET

GUOQ

88.3

VOQC

GUOQ

87.0

BQSKit

GUOQ
GUOQ
GUOQ

97.2

QUESO

96.0

Quartz

80.2

Quarl*

0
20
40
60
80
100
% benchmarks GUOQ better/match/worse (left to right)

Figure 1. Summary of guoq compared to state-of-the-art
on 2-qubit-gate reduction for the ibmq20 gate set. guoq and
BQSKit are allowed to approximate the circuit up to 𝜖 = 10−8 .
*Quarl requires an NVIDIA A100 (40GB) GPU to run.

Introduction

Quantum computing enables efficient simulation of quantum mechanical phenomena, promising to catalyze advances
in quantum physics, chemistry, materials science, and beyond. Near-term quantum computers with more than a thousand qubits operating in a noisy environment without error
correction have already been deployed, marking the current era of Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (nisq) computing [48]. Recent groundbreaking experiments have implemented error-corrected logical qubits and demonstrated
potential for reducing logical error [7, 12]. Although many
challenges remain, fault-tolerant quantum computing (ftqc)
is on the horizon.
In both nisq and ftqc, reducing errors is a critical obstacle
to overcome. Every quantum operation has a probability of
failure causing a quantum execution to quickly devolve into
random noise. The nisq paradigm aims to mitigate these
errors in the absence of error correction primarily by reducing the number of operations. However, error correction in
ftqc is not a panacea and introduces its own unique bottlenecks [9, 58], which can render the error correction scheme
useless if left untamed. Especially in the near term, ftqc
architectures may face challenges in handling large circuit
depths due to physical imperfections such as two-level system (TLS) drift, qubit leakage, high-energy particle strikes,

and crosstalk [1, 7, 38]. Therefore, it is of utmost importance
to reduce the number of operations for ftqc as well.
Current approaches tackling quantum circuit optimization primarily apply peephole optimization using a fixed
set of rewrite rules. Some tools use a small set of handcrafted rules [20, 29, 40], while others automatically synthesize rules [66, 67]. The idea is to apply rewrite rules in
a schedule, transforming subcircuits to semantically equivalent ones with fewer operations. Rewrite rules are fast to
apply—match a pattern and rewrite it—but inherently only
perform local optimizations.
An orthogonal line of work has been studying the problem
of unitary synthesis. A unitary matrix precisely represents the
semantics of a quantum program. Some quantum algorithms
are simple to state in the form of a unitary but nontrivial
to decompose into elementary operations that can be executed on hardware [15, 18]. Thus, a large body of work
has focused on synthesizing quantum circuits that implement a given unitary matrix [4, 13, 26, 43, 50, 51, 59, 62, 68].
Recent works [44, 65] have applied these algorithms to optimize quantum circuits by partitioning large circuits into
manageably-sized subcircuits consisting of a few qubits at
most and then resynthesizing each subcircuit to produce a
new subcircuit whose unitary is equivalent, or close enough,
1

