Automatic Tracing in Task-Based Runtime Systems
Rohan Yadav

Michael Bauer

David Broman

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
rohany@cs.stanford.edu

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
mbauer@nvidia.com

KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
dbro@kth.se

Michael Garland

Alex Aiken

Fredrik Kjolstad

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
mgarland@nvidia.com

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
aiken@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
kjolstad@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Implicitly parallel task-based runtime systems often perform
dynamic analysis to discover dependencies in and extract
parallelism from sequential programs. Dependence analysis becomes expensive as task granularity drops below a
threshold. Tracing techniques have been developed where
programmers annotate repeated program fragments (traces)
issued by the application, and the runtime system memoizes
the dependence analysis for those fragments, greatly reducing overhead when the fragments are executed again. However, manual trace annotation can be brittle and not easily
applicable to complex programs built through the composition of independent components. We introduce Apophenia,
a system that automatically traces the dependence analysis of task-based runtime systems, removing the burden of
manual annotations from programmers and enabling new
and complex programs to be traced. Apophenia identifies
traces dynamically through a series of dynamic string analyses, which find repeated program fragments in the stream of
tasks issued to the runtime system. We show that Apophenia is able to come between 0.92x–1.03x the performance of
manually traced programs, and is able to effectively trace
previously untraced programs to yield speedups of between
0.91x–2.82x on the Perlmutter and Eos supercomputers.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Distributed
programming languages.
Keywords: Dynamic Analysis; Runtime Systems; Tracing
ACM Reference Format:
Rohan Yadav, Michael Bauer, David Broman, Michael Garland, Alex
Aiken, and Fredrik Kjolstad. 2025. Automatic Tracing in Task-Based
Runtime Systems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3,
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707237

2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707237

1

Introduction

Implicitly parallel programming systems [3, 10, 12, 26, 42]
automatically extract parallelism from a sequential source
program through different forms of dynamic dependence
analysis. Automatic parallelization and communication inference has enabled composable high-level libraries [7, 41] to be
built on top of implicitly parallel task-based runtime systems.
However, the cost of the dependence analysis affects the performance of implicitly parallel systems at scale and places
a floor on the minimum problem size that can be executed
efficiently [34]. Applications with tasks that are too small to
amortize the cost of dependence analysis is dominated by it
and run at low efficiency.
To improve the performance of implicitly parallel taskbased runtime systems, researchers have proposed techniques [24, 25] to memoize, or trace, the dependence analysis.
Tracing records the results of the dependence analysis for
an issued program fragment, and then replays the results of
the analysis the next time an identical program fragment is
issued. Tracing has been shown to yield significant speedups
by eliminating the cost of the dependence analysis on iterative programs. For example, tracing can reduce the per-task
overhead in the Legion [10] runtime system from ∼1ms to
∼100𝜇s [8], widening the scope of applications for which
task-based runtime systems can be effective.
A significant limitation of existing tracing techniques is
that they require the programmer to annotate repeatedly issued program fragments with stop/start markers for the runtime system. Programmer inserted annotations derail an important feature of implicitly parallel programming systems—
their correctness under program composition. As users develop modular programs that pass data from one component
to another, the runtime system ensures that computations
launched by different modules maintain sequential semantics by implicitly inserting the necessary data movement and
synchronization. However, programmer introduced trace
annotations do not obey these composition principles, and
the correct placement of trace annotations when composing

