Earth+: on-board satellite imagery compression
leveraging historical earth observations
Kuntai Du1 , Yihua Cheng1 , Peder Olsen2 , Shadi Noghabi2∗ , Ranveer Chandra2 , Junchen Jiang1
1 The University of Chicago
2 Microsoft Research
mission-specific satellites handle the downlink-capacity limitation by filtering images onboard the satellite [38, 64] to
focus only on mission-specific areas prepaid by the customer.
However, this approach is not sufficient for general-purpose
satellite constellations (e.g., Sentinel-2 [40], Doves [58]), whose
goal is to capture and download satellite imagery over wide
geographical regions to serve more applications.
This paper aims to improve onboard compression for satellite imagery.1 . We are inspired by the observation that the
terrestrial content changes slowly between two consecutive
satellite visits at the same location [61, 69]. Thus, to compress a new image, we can compare it with a recent image
of the same region, called a reference image, to detect the
geographic tiles (defined in §3) within the region that has
changed and then only compress and download the changed
tiles. Our measurement on Planet dataset [58] shows that
without the interference of clouds, only 20% of the tiles in
each image have changed in the previous five days on average, which ideally can save downlink usage by up-to 5×
(§3).
Yet, realizing the reference-based encoding for onboard
imagery compression can be challenging because the reference image should be as fresh and contain as little cloud as
possible (§3). Typically, the last cloud-free image captured
by the same satellite [58] can be over 50 days old on average
(§3). With such a large time gap, the reference image and
the new image may have substantial differences (more than
50% of the tiles will have significant changes as shown in
§3), making reference-based encoding less effective.
We present Earth+, a constellation-wide reference-based
encoding system, where the reference images can be selected
from historical images of any satellites in the constellation.
By broadening the set of potential reference images, Earth+
increases the probability of obtaining fresh and cloud-free
reference images. For example, with images from an entire
constellation [58], cloud-free images can be obtained every
4.21 days on average, instead of every 50 days with one
satellite (§4.1).
To enable image sharing across satellites in a constellation,
Earth+ leverages the existing uplinks (ground-to-satellite) to
upload fresh and cloud-free reference images that have been
downloaded from different satellites as illustrated in Figure 1.

arXiv:2403.11434v1 [cs.NI] 18 Mar 2024

ABSTRACT
With the increasing deployment of earth observation satellite
constellations, the downlink (satellite-to-ground) capacity often limits the freshness, quality, and coverage of the imagery
data available to applications on the ground. To overcome
the downlink limitation, we present Earth+, a new satellite
imagery compression system that, instead of compressing
each image individually, pinpoints and downloads only recent imagery changes with respect to the history reference
images. To minimize the amount of changes, it is critical
to make reference images as fresh as possible. Earth+ enables each satellite to choose fresh reference images from
not only its own history images but also past images of other
satellites from an entire satellite constellation. To share reference images across satellites, Earth+ utilizes the limited
capacity of the existing uplink (ground-to-satellite) by judiciously selecting and compressing reference images while
still allowing accurate change detection. In short, Earth+
is the first to make reference-based compression efficient,
by enabling constellation-wide sharing of fresh reference
images across satellites. Our evaluation shows that Earth+
can reduce the downlink usage by a factor of 3.3 compared
to state-of-the-art on-board image compression techniques
while not sacrificing image quality, or using more on-board
computing or storage resources, or more uplink bandwidth
than currently available.

1

INTRODUCTION

Fresh and high-quality satellite imagery is key to many applications, from digital agriculture [19, 44, 56, 57], environmental monitoring [5, 35, 53, 66, 67], to automatic road detection [21, 47, 68], and many more. As a result, large constellations of Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO) earth observation satellites
have been deployed [37, 58, 64] to capture high-quality imagery for any location multiple times a day [37, 58, 64].
However, most satellite imagery data captured by these
satellites are currently not received on the ground due to the
limited downlink (satellite-to-ground) capacity. According to
a recent estimate, only 2% of the total image data observed
by each satellite can be downloaded to the ground [37]. Some

1 Better imagery compression can also improve filtering-based solutions

∗ This work is done while in Microsoft Research.

like [64].

1

