Protecting cryptographic code against Spectre-RSB
(and, in fact, all known Spectre variants)
Santiago Arranz Olmos1 , Gilles Barthe2
Chitchanok Chuengsatiansup3 , Benjamin Grégoire4
, Vincent Laporte5
Tiago Oliveira6 , Peter Schwabe7
, Yuval Yarom8 , Zhiyuan Zhang9
MPI-SP, Bochum, Germany
Inria, Sophia Antipolis, France
SandboxAQ, USA
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
IMDEA Software Institute, Madrid, Spain
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, F-54000 Nancy, France
1

santiago.arranz-olmos@mpi-sp.org 2 gilles.barthe@mpi-sp.org
c.chuengsatiansup@unimelb.edu.au 4 benjamin.gregoire@inria.fr
5
vincent.laporte@inria.fr 6 tiago.oliveira@sandboxquantum.com
7
peter@cryptojedi.org 8 yuval.yarom@rub.de 9 zhiyuanz5@student.unimelb.edu.au
3

Abstract—It is fundamental that executing cryptographic software must not leak secrets through side-channels. For softwarevisible side-channels, it was long believed that “constant-time”
programming would be sufﬁcient as a systematic countermeasure. However, this belief was shattered in 2018 by attacks
exploiting speculative execution—so called Spectre attacks.
Recent work shows that language support sufﬁces to protect
cryptographic code with minimal overhead against one class
of such attacks, Spectre v1, but leaves an open question of
whether this result can be extended to also cover other classes
of Spectre attacks.
In this paper, we answer this question in the afﬁrmative:
We design, validate, implement, and verify an approach
to protect cryptographic implementations against all known
classes of Spectre attacks—the main challenge in this endeavor is attacks exploiting the return stack buffer, which
are known as Spectre-RSB. Our approach combines a new
value-dependent information-ﬂow type system that enforces
speculative constant-time in an idealized model of transient
execution and a compiler transformation that realizes this
idealized model on the generated low-level code. Using the
Coq proof assistant, we prove that the type system is sound
with respect to the idealized semantics and that the compiler
transformation preserves speculative constant-time.
We implement our approach in the Jasmin framework for highassurance cryptography and demonstrate that the overhead
incurred by full Spectre protections is below 2% for most

cryptographic primitives and reaches only about 5–7% for
the more complex post-quantum key-encapsulation mechanism
Kyber.

1. Introduction
In this paper we present techniques to systematically
protect high-performance cryptographic software against
all known classes of Spectre attacks. Our work uses the
computer-aided cryptography paradigm [12], i.e., we employ
methodologies and tools from formal methods to build very
efﬁcient and formally veriﬁed cryptographic software. More
speciﬁcally, we build our solution as part of Jasmin [4],
[7], a programming language and framework that has been
used to produce highly optimized and machine checked
implementations of symmetric cryptography [7], ellipticcurve cryptography [4], hash functions [6] and very recently
also post-quantum cryptography [5]. The Jasmin compiler
is formally proven in Coq to preserve semantics, and offers
tools to ensure properties relating to implementation security
like memory safety, thread safety, and absence of secretdependent branches and secretly indexed memory access;
and furthermore offers an interface to the EasyCrypt [26]
interactive theorem prover for proofs of functional correctness of implementations, that can be further connected to
computer-veriﬁed reductionist cryptographic proofs of security, as, for instance, in [13], [14], [8].

