ARC: Warp-level Adaptive Atomic Reduction in GPUs
to Accelerate Differentiable Rendering
Sankeerth Durvasula∗

Adrian Zhao∗

Fan Chen

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada

Ruofan Liang

Pawan Kumar Sanjaya

Yushi Guan

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

Christina Giannoula

Nandita Vijaykumar

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada

Abstract
Differentiable rendering is widely used in emerging applications that represent any 3D scene as a model trained using
gradient descent from 2D images. Recent works (e.g., 3D
Gaussian Splatting) use rasterization to enable rendering
photo-realistic imagery at high speeds from these learned
3D models. These rasterization-based differentiable rendering methods have been demonstrated to be very promising,
providing state-of-art quality for various important tasks.
However, training a model to represent a scene is still timeconsuming even on powerful GPUs. In this work, we observe
that the gradient computation step during model training is
a significant bottleneck due to the large number of atomic
operations. These atomics overwhelm the atomic units in the
L2 cache of GPUs, causing long stalls.
To address this, we leverage the observations that during gradient computation: (1) for most warps, all threads
atomically update the same memory locations; and (2) warps
generate varying amount of atomic traffic. We propose ARC,
a primitive that accelerates atomic operations based on two
key ideas: First, we enable warp-level reduction at the GPU
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707238

cores using registers to leverage the locality in intra-warp
atomic updates. Second, we distribute atomic computation
between the cores and the L2 atomic units to increase the
throughput of atomic computation. We propose two implementations of ARC: ARC-HW, a hardware-based approach
and ARC-SW, a software-only approach. We demonstrate
significant speedups with ARC of 2.6× on average (up to
5.7×) for widely used differentiable rendering workloads.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Architectures; • Computing methodologies → Rendering;
Machine learning.
Keywords: Differentiable Rendering, Atomics, Gaussian Splatting, Machine Learning, Graphics Processing Unit
ACM Reference Format:
Sankeerth Durvasula, Adrian Zhao, Fan Chen, Ruofan Liang, Pawan
Kumar Sanjaya, Yushi Guan, Christina Giannoula, and Nandita
Vijaykumar. 2025. ARC: Warp-level Adaptive Atomic Reduction
in GPUs to Accelerate Differentiable Rendering. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707238

1

Introduction

Learned 3D scene representations have been a fast-advancing
field in recent years. For example, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [22, 23, 28, 43, 50, 73, 76, 79, 93, 95, 110] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26, 36, 46, 54–57, 71, 72, 74, 90,
96, 100, 101, 103, 105–107, 109, 114, 115] have demonstrated
new capabilities with applications in many domains including entertainment, health care, robotics, and AR/VR. These
3D scene representations comprise learned parameters and
provide state-of-art quality in scene reconstruction, among

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

many other advantages, compared to traditional explicit representations (e.g., meshes and point clouds). They have thus
emerged as a transformative representation of 3D visual
data, leading to high interest in the computer graphics and
robotics communities.
Differentiable rendering is a key technique in 3D scene
representations that leverages machine learning to solve
fundamental tasks in computer graphics, such as scene reconstruction [55, 76] (deriving a 3D scene representation),
and inverse rendering [80, 81] (estimating the shape, texture,
lighting, and material of 3D objects) from a set of captured
reference images. These tasks are fundamental to many important applications [97], such as photogrammetry, 3D modeling and scanning, 3D model creation tools, game engines,
and AR/VR applications. With differentiable rendering, these
tasks are formulated as a learning problem that can be solved
using gradient descent-based optimization techniques.
NeRF [22, 23, 28, 43, 50, 73, 76, 79, 93, 95, 110] is a popular differentiable rendering technique where each scene is
represented as a set of learned parameters/neural networks.
These neural parameters are trained with gradient-based optimization to minimize the difference between ground truth
images and rendered images from the NeRF model. The success of this approach has led to the development of several
specialized frameworks/libraries for differentiable rendering [52, 63, 81, 83], native support for differentiable rendering
in GPUs [21, 49], and accelerators for NeRF-based rendering
and training [66, 67, 69, 77, 102]. NeRFs, however, use ray
marching, which can be inefficient in rendering images.
More recent advancements in differentiable rendering
over NeRFs are approaches such as 3DGS [26, 36, 46, 54–
57, 71, 72, 74, 90, 96, 100, 101, 103, 105–107, 109, 114, 115]
that leverage the high-speed rasterization pipeline [20] instead of ray marching. Rasterization requires the scene to
be represented as a set of geometric primitives (i.e., meshes,
triangles, points) in 3D space which can be rendered as 2D
images at high speeds. Differentiable rendering with rasterization involves learning these primitives using similar gradient descent-based training. This approach [41, 55, 64, 80, 87]
has demonstrated state-of-the-art capability in producing
high-quality scene reconstructions at high speeds. 3DGS represents the scene with 3D Gaussian densities as its primitives
and uses an efficient rasterizer [55] to render images.
The raster-based pipeline enables high-speed rendering
(i.e. the forward pass). However, training raster-based models is still much slower compared to rendering. Training
involves a forward pass (rendering an image), loss computation, gradient computation, and applying gradient updates
to these learned parameters. A new model has to be trained
for each individual scene. We perform a detailed performance
analysis of training and find that the gradient computation
step of the backward pass is a significant bottleneck. For
example, in 3DGS workloads (see §6 for details), the gradient

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

computation kernel takes on average 51.9% (up to 65.8%) of
the overall training time on the NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU (§3).
Our analysis shows that this bottleneck is primarily caused
by a large number of atomic operations that accumulate gradients for the trained parameters. During gradient computation, each thread is associated with one pixel. The gradients
for all primitives associated with the pixel are computed and
accumulated. These gradient updates are performed using
atomic operations, since multiple threads may update the
same parameters. This leads to a massive number of atomic
operations launched by each thread. These atomic operations cause significant contention at the atomic units in the
L2 memory subpartitions (ROP units), causing long stalls at
the streaming multiprocessors (SMs) (§3.2).
Our goal in this work is to accelerate raster-based differentiable rendering applications by accelerating atomic
operations that constitute a significant bottleneck during
gradient computation. From our analysis of atomic operations in gradient computation, we make two observations: (1)
Locality in intra-warp atomic updates: Threads within
a warp typically update the same parameters and thus the
same memory location. We find that over 99% of warps have
all their threads update the same memory location (§3.1).
(2) Only a subset of threads in a warp perform atomic
updates: There is significant variation in the number of
threads within each warp that make gradient updates during
gradient computation (§3.1) as some threads are made inactive due to failing condition checks in the code (i.e., control
divergence). The number of threads executing atomics determines the atomic request traffic generated by the warp and
varies across warps. Prior GPU approaches [19, 30, 32, 78]
that aim to address bottlenecks due to atomic requests buffer
and aggregate atomic updates in the L1 cache/scratchpad
memory/local SRAM to reduce traffic in the interconnect
and L2 atomic units (ROP units). While these approaches
can partially alleviate atomic overheads, they do not fully
leverage the intra-warp locality in atomic updates seen in
differentiable rendering. Thus, the sheer number of atomic
requests overwhelm the load-store units before the atomics
can be aggregated at L1, making this approach less effective
for differentiable rendering workloads (See §7.1 and §8).
In this work, we introduce Adaptive Atomic ReduCtion
(ARC), a primitive that accelerates atomic updates in applications that (1) generate significantly large amounts of
atomic requests and (2) typically have most threads within
an warp performing atomic updates to the same memory
locations. ARC is based on two key ideas: (1) We leverage
intra-warp locality in atomic updates (Observation 1) to perform warp-level reduction at the core itself using registers.
This significantly reduces the number of atomic operations
that need to be sent to the L2 atomic units to update global
memory. (2) We dynamically distribute the atomic computation between the cores and L2 atomic units to enable high
throughput atomic updates by employing all atomic units.

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

Leveraging Observation 2, warps that only generate a few
atomic updates are handled at the L2 atomic units. Warps,
where most/all threads generate atomic updates, are first
reduced at the SM using the proposed warp-level reduction.
Implementing ARC requires addressing important design
challenges (§4.1). We propose two ARC implementations:
ARC-HW. We propose a hardware-software primitive that
uses a low-overhead hardware module in the SMs to perform warp-level reduction using registers and leveraging the
address coalescing unit. To distribute atomic computation
between the SM and ROP units, we dynamically schedule the
atomic computations based on their utilization. ARC-HW is
exposed to the programmer using a new ISA instruction.
ARC-SW† . This software-only approach leverages existing warp-level primitives (such as shfl) to implement warplevel reduction at each SM sub-core. All atomic updates to
any memory location involving more than a predefined number of threads in a warp are performed at the SM, and the
others are performed at the ROP units. This predefined number is a tunable hyperparameter (the balancing threshold).
ARC-SW can be directly used in many modern GPUs, but
ARC-HW is more efficient as there are no overheads from
additional instructions, redundant computation, or control
flow; it requires less programmer intervention; and does not
rely on instructions specific to some GPUs (§4.3).
We evaluate ARC across recent widely used differentiable
rendering applications (3D Gaussian Splatting [55], NVDiffRec [80], Pulsar [64, 83]). With ARC-HW, we demonstrate
an average speedup of 2.1× (up to 8.6×) for gradient computation using GPGPU-Sim GPU simulator [58]. With ARC-SW,
we demonstrate a speedup of 1.8× on average (up to 7.2×)
for gradient computation on the simulator. On a real NVIDIA
RTX 4090 GPU, we demonstrate a speedup of 2.6× on average (up to 5.7×) on gradient computation, and an average
end-to-end speedup of 1.4× (up to 2.4×). Our contributions
are summarized as follows:
• This is the first work to perform a performance characterization of an important workload, rasterization-based
differential rendering for 3D visual data including Gaussian
Splatting, and identify atomic updates as a key bottleneck.
• We introduce ARC, a primitive to accelerate atomic computations in GPUs for raster-based differentiable rendering.
• We propose two implementations: ARC-HW, a low-overhead
hardware atomic reduction framework, and ARC-SW, a
SW-only implementation. We open source ARC-SW [12],
which can be directly used to obtain significant speedups
in raster-based differentiable rendering workloads.
• We evaluate ARC on both real hardware and using a simulator and demonstrate significant speedups for widely-used
differentiable rendering applications.
† The open-source code repository for ARC-SW is publicly available at

https://github.com/Accelsnow/gaussian-splatting-distwar, along with the
extended original technical report [37].

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

2

Background

2.1

Atomic Processing in GPUs

Figure 1 shows a Streaming Multiprocessor (SM) of a GPU [3,
5, 6]. Each SM consists of multiple sub-cores 1 with its own
warp scheduler, register file, and execution units. Each subcore sends local, global, and atomic memory requests to the
MIO (Memory I/O Unit), which interfaces with the caches
and memory subsystem through a queue [13] (sometimes
called L1 instruction queue 2 ). In this work, we refer to the
unit that dispatches requests from the sub-cores to the caches
and memory subsystem as the Load-Store Unit (LSU) (consistent with NVIDIA’s NSIGHT terminology [13]). Atomic
operations sent to the LSU are issued to the memory subpartition 3 via the interconnect. The memory subpartition
contains compute units (known as ROP units) [5, 6, 17] that
process the atomic requests in the L2 cache. The L2 cache
is shared across all SMs [47, 89]. A large number of atomic
requests may lead to contention at the ROP units.
1

1

Sub-Core

Sub-Core

1

1

Sub-Core

Sub-Core

2
LSU

MIO
SM

L1 Inst. Queue

L1 / Texture / Scratchpad

ICNT

3

L2 Memory
Subpartition

ROPs

L2 Memory
Subpartition

ROPs

3

L2 Memory
Subpartition

ROPs

3

Figure 1. Atomic processing in a GPU.
2.2

Differentiable Rendering for 3D Scene
Reconstruction

Differentiable rendering is the backbone of important applications, including 3D modeling/reconstruction [48, 108],
perception in autonomous driving [104, 112], SLAM [75, 103],
AI-generated content [96], and medical imaging [70], and
provides a powerful fundamental representation for 3D data.
We describe differentiable rendering using a classic problem
in graphics: 3D scene reconstruction, which involves creating
a 3D scene representation from 2D images. 3D reconstruction
has important applications in novel view synthesis, 3D scanning/modeling, and photogrammetry. With differentiable
rendering, the scene is represented using a set of parameters
(i.e., model) that are learned using gradient descent, similar
to standard deep learning training. This process of training
a model to represent a 3D scene is depicted in Figure 2.
Reference
Images

Scene (Model)
With Learnable
Parameters

Differentiable
Renderer

Loss

Forward
Backward

Figure 2. A generalized differentiable rendering training
pipeline to train a model to learn a 3D scene.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Differentiable Rendering with Rasterization

NeRFs (neural radiance fields) are a differentiable renderingbased representation, but use ray marching to render images in the scene. More recent advances in differentiable
rendering [55, 63, 64, 83, 87] propose to use rasterization
instead of ray marching, enabling the rendering of images
at much higher speeds. Rasterization requires the scene to
be composed of several discrete 3D geometric elements, or
primitives (e.g., triangles, points, ellipsoids). Each of these
primitives is associated with shading information (e.g., color,
opacity) and a position in space. Figure 3 depicts how these
primitives 1 (ellipsoids in this example) are rendered into
2D images 2 . Each pixel of the rendered image is thus influenced by a subset of the primitives in the scene. With
differentiable rendering, all primitives are associated with a
set of learnable parameters 3 that are trained using gradient descent. For each training iteration (i.e., one image), the
loss 4 is backpropagated 5 to compute the gradients for all
the parameters associated with each primitive 6 (only primitives that influence the current image). These parameters
are updated with the computed gradients 7 , and the training iterations continue until convergence is achieved (i.e.,
the primitives are able to accurately represent the scene from
all angles). 3D Gaussian Splatting [55], a state-of-art rasterbased differentiable rendering method, models scenes with
3D Gaussians (seen as ellipsoids) as the geometric primitives.

3

Motivation

In this section, we profile important raster-based differentiable rendering workloads on the NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU

Fragments

Primitive Parameters: 3
𝝁, 𝜮 :3D Gaussian
𝑷 = 𝜶 : Opacity
𝒄 : Color

Gradients
6 𝒅𝑷

7

Rendered Image
2

Shading+
Blending

Rasterize

1

Gradient
Descent Step:
𝑷 ← 𝑷 − 𝒅𝑷

Gradient
Computation

5

Loss

4

Forward
Backward

Figure 3. Differentiable rendering flow with rasterization.
(methodology is described in §6). Figure 4 depicts the breakdown of training time, including the forward pass (during
which an image is rendered from the model), loss calculation
(which involves computing the difference between ground
truth and rendered image), and the gradient computation
(which involves computing and updating the loss gradient
with respect to model parameters). We make the following
observations. First, we observe that on RTX 4090 on average 44% (up to 66%) of the total execution time is spent on
the gradient computation step and is thus a significant bottleneck in most workloads. Second, this bottleneck is most
pronounced for workloads such as 3D-DR and 3D-PL (see §6),
taking up 65.8% and 62% of the overall runtime, respectively.
This is because DR and PL are real-world scenes that require
a large number of primitives (i.e., a large model) for accuracy.
There is a larger increase in gradient computation time with
scene size and complexity compared to the forward pass.
This is because the forward pass has more parallelism that is
extracted as the number of primitives increases, but gradient
computation is limited by atomic operations, thus becoming
a bigger bottleneck in more complex scenes.

Training time

2.3

Camera & Scene
Primitive

Backprop

The differentiable renderer produces 2D images of the
represented 3D scene at different viewpoints during the forward pass (Figure 2). The difference between a rendered
image and its corresponding reference/ground truth image
(i.e., loss) is obtained by subtracting their RGB values. This
loss is backpropagated to calculate gradients for all model
parameters that minimize the loss using gradient descentbased optimization (the backward pass in Figure 2). This process is repeated for images from all viewpoints. Examples,
also referred to as implicit representations, include neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) [76] and 3D Gaussians [55]. These
models represent scenes with differentiable, compact representations and achieve the state-of-art performance in
novel-view synthesis. The high-quality model reconstruction and rendering, even from few input images, has spurred
tremendous interest in vision and graphics communities and
these learned models have emerged as a transformative representation for 3D scenes. These representations do have
shortcomings compared to traditional representations (e.g.,
meshes, point clouds) as they are difficult to edit, can be
computationally expensive, and learn surfaces inaccurately.
Addressing these challenges is a very active area of ongoing
research [23, 25, 39, 42, 65, 82, 100, 106].

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

100%

gradient computation
loss calculation

forward pass
others

75%
50%
25%
0%

Figure 4. Training time breakdown on 4090 (left) and 3060
(right)
Figure 5 depicts the algorithm for the gradient computation step of differentiable rendering workloads. The input to
the gradient computation kernel is a per-pixel list of primitives, where each list contains the IDs of primitives that
influence the color of the corresponding pixel (discussed
in §2.3). Each thread (one per pixel) iterates through a list
of its associated primitives (line 2, 3). Several intermediate
conditions (like 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑1, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑2 in lines 5 and 9) determine if
the current thread contributes to each primitive’s gradients.
Each thread then computes the gradient contribution of the
primitive’s parameters (𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡 𝑥1, 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡 𝑥2, ...). Finally, each

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

thread atomically adds its gradient contributions to the primitive’s parameters (shown in lines 12-14).
1: function GradComputation(prims_per_thread)
2:
𝑡𝑖𝑑 ← 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥
⊲ Thread corr. to pixel
3:
for 𝑝 : 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 [𝑡𝑖𝑑] do
⊲ Iterate
4:
if cond1 then
5:
continue;
⊲ thread doesn’t participate
6:
end if
7:
...
8:
if cond2 then
9:
continue;
⊲ thread doesn’t participate
10:
end if
11:
...
⊲ Gradient computation is done here
12:
AtomicAdd(𝑝.𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑_𝑥1, 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡 𝑥1)
13:
AtomicAdd(𝑝.𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑_𝑥2, 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡 𝑥2)
14:
AtomicAdd(𝑝.𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑_𝑥3, 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑡 𝑥3)
15:
end for
16: end function

threads to update each parameter (Figure 5 line 12-14). We
perform an experiment to determine the number of threads
in each active warp that updates the same parameters and
thus, the same memory locations. For 3D-PL (see §6 for workload details), we find that over 99% of warps have all their
threads update the same memory location.
Observation 2: Only a fraction of threads within a
warp perform atomic updates at any given time. From
Figure 5, we see that the gradient computation step has certain dynamic conditions (𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑1, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑2, ...) that cause some
threads to skip the current iteration of gradient updates.
Thus, only a fraction of all threads within a warp sends out
atomic requests in one iteration. We measure the number of
threads that typically participate in the atomic reduction in
Figure 7 for two different workloads 3D-PR and NV-LG (see §6
for workload details). We observe that there is significant
variation in the number of threads in a warp that participate
in one reduction. Thus, each warp contributes a different
amount of traffic to the LSU and the ROP units.

Characteristics of Gradient Computation Step

We analyze the characteristics of the gradient computation
step using real differentiable rendering workloads (See §6).
We make two key observations from profiling the atomic
operations in the gradient computation step:
Observation 1: Threads within a warp are likely to
update the same parameters. Each primitive affects a
region of pixels on the screen, called a “fragment” (§2.3). As
a result, close-by pixels that belong to the same fragment update the same primitive. Figure 6 shows how adjacent/closeby pixels are part of the same fragment during rasterization.
Figure 6a shows a primitive 1 rasterized onto a screen 2 as
seen from the camera indicated by the blue pixels during rendering. In the gradient computation step, each of these blue
pixels affected will update the primitive’s gradient. Figure 6b
shows a zoomed-in version of the captured image.

10^6

10^5

10^4
1

5

9

13

17

21

25

29

Par�cipa�ng Threads
Firefox

file:///C:/Users/sanke/Pictures/pt2.svg

(a) 3D-PR workload

Gradient Updates

3.1

file:///C:/Users/sanke/Pictures/pt1.svg

Gradient Updates

Firefox

Figure 5. Execution flow of the gradient computation step

10^7
10^6
10^5
10^4
1

5

9

13

17

21

25

29

Par�cipa�ng Threads
(b) NV-LG workload

Figure 7. Log-scale histograms of average number of active
threads per warp that participate in gradient updates.

2

1 of 1

1
Geometric Primitive
in Space

All
pixels
update primitive 1

(a) Close-by pixels likely to be (b) Gradients of affected pixels
influenced by same primitive. are atomically aggregated.

Figure 6. Close-by threads (corresponding to pixels) update
the parameters of the same primitive.
Thus, threads within a warp (where each thread corresponds to one pixel and each warp corresponds to a local
region of pixels) often compute the gradients for the parameters associated with the same primitive. This explains
why these gradients must be atomically summed up across

2024-12-15, 12:51 a.m.

3.2 Atomic Bottleneck in the Gradient Computation
Given that each thread updates a number of primitives, each
of which has many learned parameters, a massive number
of atomic operations is generated. To evaluate the impact of
this, we analyze the cycles during the gradient computation
step when instructions are stalled from executing. Figure 8
depicts the breakdown of the number of cycles a warp is
stalled per instruction using NVIDIA Nsight profiler [13] on
two GPUs. We make two key observations: First, the LSU
(load-store unit) stalls contribute over 60% of all stalls on
average. The LSU stalls are caused due to the large number
of memory requests (primarily atomic operations) to global
1 of 1

2024-12-15, 12:52 a.m.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

Sub-Core

Warp Stall Cycles

memory from each sub-core (§2.1). These workloads also
have high cache hit rates (97% L2 hit rate on average on both
RTX 4090 and RTX 3060 across all workloads), indicating
that the memory stalls are not caused by cache misses, but
atomic operations. Second, the RTX 4090 GPU has more
stalls in issuing instructions to the LSU compared to the RTX
3060. This is because more recent GPUs have a higher SM to
ROP unit ratio. In our experimental setup, the RTX 4090 has
4.57× more SMs than the RTX 3060 (128 SMs and 28 SMs,
respectively). However, the RTX 4090 only has about 3.6×
more ROP units (176 ROP units versus 48 ROP units).
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

LSU Stall
Scoreboard Stall
Other

Figure 8. Breakdown of warp stalls on 4090 (left) and 3060
(right).
To this end, our goal is to enable faster raster-based differentiable rendering methods by accelerating atomic operations that constitute a significant bottleneck.

4

Approach

We introduce ARC, a primitive that enables fast atomic reduction in applications that (1) generate a large number of
atomic requests, thus overwhelming the hardware queues
and compute units that process atomics, and (2) typically
have most threads within an warp performing atomic updates to the same memory locations.
The key ideas behind ARC is to (i) leverage the intra-warp
locality in atomic updates to perform warp-level reduction
in the SM itself using registers, and (ii) distribute atomic
computation between the SM and L2 ROP units to enable
high throughput atomic reduction. A high-level overview of
ARC is shown in Figure 9. At each sub-core, ARC’s scheduler 1 determines whether each atomic update should be
performed locally as warp-level reduction in the core ( 3
and 4 ) or using the atomic units at the L2 ROPs. 2 .
We propose two implementations of ARC: (i) ARC-HW,
a hardware-software cooperative approach that efficiently
implements warp-level reduction at each sub-core and automatically distributes reduction computation between the
core and L2 ROP units, and (ii) ARC-SW, a software-only approach that leverages existing warp-level primitives in some
GPUs to implement the ideas in ARC. ARC-SW can be used
directly in many existing GPUs using our open-source implementation. However, ARC-HW is more efficient because
it eliminates additional instruction overheads from handling
divergence and control flow in software, can be implemented

Warp Scheduler
Dispatch Unit

Atomic Ops …

FUs

…

ARC Scheduler 1
Reduce
4

+

…

3

2
LDST

To
LSU

Register File

Figure 9. High-level overview of ARC. FUs refers to functional units (e.g., IADD, FFMA), and LDST refers to memory
units within each sub-core that handles and forwards memory requests to the LSU.
flexibly in GPUs that do not support these primitives (e.g.,
Intel GPUs), and requires less programmer effort (See §4.5).
4.1

Design Challenges of ARC

ARC addresses two design challenges:
Challenge 1 : All threads in warp may not generate
atomic updates. Only a subset of threads in a warp typically generate atomic updates at any given time (as discussed
in §3.1). Existing warp-level instructions thus cannot be directly used to perform warp-level reduction for differentiable
rendering workloads. This irregularity poses challenges in
developing an efficient implementation of warp-level reduction at the core level.
Challenge 2 : Dynamic scheduling of atomic computation between the core and L2. To meet the high throughput
requirements for atomic computations in differentiable rendering, it is critical to effectively use both existing ROP units
at the L2 as well as the proposed warp-level reduction at the
sub-cores. Thus, ARC must schedule the atomic operations
efficiently at runtime based on the utilization of the atomic
units at the sub-cores and the L2.
4.2

Warp-Level Reduction with Primitives and
Software Libraries

Existing shuffle primitives do not take predicate registers
and do not have logic masks for filtering active threads. The
mask argument in shfl_sync primitive [11] is a synchronization mask; it does not prevent fetching from or saving
to inactive threads, thus causing undefined behavior. An "if"
condition does not solve the problem, as the inactive threads
have already diverged due to earlier condition checks. CUDA
software libraries such as CCCL [14] and CUB [15] provide
highly optimized implementations for warp-level reduction
using existing instructions, but these libraries assume that all

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

threads within a warp are active. For differentiable rendering
workloads, all threads often do not participate in reduction.
These approaches do not address either Challenge 1 or 2 .
We quantitatively compare ARC with warp-level reduction
of the CCCL library in §7.2.
4.3

Key Components of ARC-HW

4.4

Key Components of ARC-SW

ARC-SW is implemented and exposed to the programmer as a
function call that can be inserted into GPU code. We describe
how we implement ARC-SW using existing instructions and
warp-level primitives.

t0

t1

t2

t3

……..

t31

ti = ith Thread
L2 ROP

+
+

....
+

(a) Serialized reduction.

t0

t16 t1

+

+

t17

……..

t31

ti = ith Thread
L2 ROP

+

+

....

ARC-HW uses hardware support to perform warp-level reduction and automatically distributes atomic computation
between the SMs and ROP units. ARC-HW is exposed to the
programmer with a new instruction, named atomred. We
next describe the workflow of ARC-HW:
Identifying Active Threads. To address Challenge 1 ,
ARC-HW identifies sets of threads within a warp that update
the same parameter (and thus memory location). This is done
by leveraging the address coalescing module that is used to
coalesce common memory addresses of threads performing a load operation. In this step, for each memory location
being updated atomically in the warp, the corresponding active threads are identified (generating an atomic transaction).
Only these threads participate in the subsequent reduction
steps since other threads are not eligible for a warp-level
reduction (because they are either inactive or do not update
the same memory location).
Warp-level Reduction. In order to perform the warplevel reduction at the sub-core, ARC-HW introduces additional logic per sub-core, which is referred to as the reduction
unit. The reduction unit contains a single floating point unit
which serially sums the gradients. The result of the reduction
is then sent to the LSU to atomically update the parameter
in global memory with the reduced gradients.
Scheduling Atomic Updates Between Core and L2
ROP. To address Challenge 2 , ARC employs a greedy scheduling algorithm and schedules the atomic transaction either
at the SM reduction unit or the LSU (for computation at the
ROPs) depending on which queue is free. When the rate of
atomic requests overwhelms the available atomic throughput of the ROP units, the requests get stalled at the LSU
queue. Such atomic stalls propagate the memory pipeline
and eventually lead to stalls within the sub-core at the LDST
units (Figure fig. 9). ARC scheduler leverages this behavior
and observes the atomic stalls at the LDST units to determine
the availability of the ROP units. When an atomic memory
transaction is generated, if the ROP units are not stalled,
the ARC scheduler schedules the atomic update instructions
directly to the ROP units. Otherwise, the atomic updates
are reduced using ARC-HW’s reduction unit in the sub-core.
The scheduling algorithm may benefit from additional information such as the number of concurrent requests and future
request predictions; however, acquiring such information
requires additional logic and hardware overhead, which adds
to the overall design complexity. Thus, we choose the greedy
algorithm that achieves high performance with negligible
hardware modifications.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

+

(b) Butterfly reduction.

Figure 10. Overview of reduction algorithms of ARC.
Warp-level Reduction (Challenge 1 ). We propose two
approaches to perform warp-level reduction that addresses
Challenge 1 , each of which has different tradeoffs. These
approaches are outlined below:
(1) Serialized Reduction: Within each warp, we first
determine a set of threads that atomically update the same
parameter (and thus memory location). One thread out of
this group then iterates through all the gradients (one from
each thread), as shown in Figure 10a. The accumulated result is then added to the parameter using a regular atomic
add operation. The serial nature of this scheme is inefficient.
However, when the warp has threads updating multiple parameters, the reductions can be parallelized.
(2) Butterfly Reduction: Figure 10b shows how butterfly reduction is performed for threads in a warp. We first
check whether all the threads in a warp update the same
primitive. If so, we use a reduction tree to sum the gradients.
For this implementation to work, it requires all threads to
be active, or for threads that are inactive, we must add a
zero value. This introduces some redundant computation.
Thus, the programmer has to ensure there is no control flow
divergence and all threads are active and assign zero-value
updates to threads that were originally inactive. Butterfly
reduction is the most efficient, when only one parameter is
being updated by the warp and most threads are active (less
redundant updates).
Scheduling Atomic Updates Between Core and L2
ROP (Challenge 2 ). As discussed in §3.1, the amount of
contention at the LSU that is contributed to by each warp
depends on the number of active threads producing atomic
requests. Additionally, the active thread count also reflects

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

the amount of reduction “work” to be done in the SM (if
the atomic update is scheduled for warp-level reduction).
To address Challenge 2 , we determine whether the atomic
updates should be performed using a warp-level reduction
at the core or at the L2 ROPs, by comparing the number of
threads in the warp that actively update one parameter over
a predefined threshold. We call this the balancing threshold,
as it balances the atomic computation between ROP units
and the SMs. This scheduling is performed for each set of
threads in a warp that updates one parameter. The optimal
balancing threshold depends on the amount of contention in
atomic units, which depends on the following:
• Dataset and workload: The number of atomic updates
depends on factors such as the camera resolution, model
architecture, and the complexity of the scene being learned.
• GPU architecture: The ratio of SMs to ROP units impacts
the contention at cores and ROP units.
• Reduction method: The choice of using the butterfly or
serial reduction method also affects the contention at the
atomic units.
Due to the complexity in determining the threshold analytically, we treat the balancing threshold as a hyperparameter
that needs to be tuned for each workload. We discuss in detail how we use the balancing threshold in §5 and evaluate
the impact of this hyperparameter in §7.2.
4.5

Advantages of ARC-HW over ARC-SW

ARC-HW addresses five limitations of ARC-SW. (i) ARC-SW
incurs additional overhead in performing redundant computations during warp-level reduction, because not all threads
produce gradient updates in every iteration (when doing
butterfly reduction). (ii) ARC-SW introduces overhead with
control flow instructions when performing warp-level reduction. (iii) Programmer intervention is required to integrate
ARC-SW (code must be converted as in §5.5). (iv) ARC-SW
requires tuning the balancing threshold hyperparameter to
get the best possible speedup. (v) Not all GPUs currently
support the instructions used in ARC-SW (e.g., Intel GPUs).

5

Detailed Design

5.1

Design of ARC-HW

Programmer Interface. ARC is exposed to the programmer
as a new instruction atomred:
atomred [%addr], %f
%addr is the memory location of the parameter that needs
to be atomically updated and %f is the floating point value to
be added. This instruction is similar to the baseline atomic
instruction, except that there is no return value.
ARC comprises two key components:
ARC Scheduler. atomred instructions are first dispatched
to this unit (shown in Figure 11), which decides whether a
warp-level reduction should be performed for the current
atomred instruction 1 . The scheduler leverages the execution status of previous atomic instructions to determine the

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

atomred Dispatch

TM ≡ Thread Mask

1

Contention Determination
Coalesce
Common
Addresses

Memory
Addresses

ARC
Scheduler

Atomic Ops
to ROP

2

TM1

3

TM2

Reduction
Unit

Figure 11. ARC scheduler module.
From ARC
Scheduler

Register File
Thread
Mask

1
Reduction
Unit

+

2

Accumulator

+ ≡ FP Unit

3

Atomic Op 4

Figure 12. ARC’s reduction computation unit
ROP utilization. If the ROP units are free, the scheduler sends
the atomred instruction as a normal atomic instruction to the
address coalescing unit to generate regular atomic requests
that are sent to the ROP units. If the ROP units are busy,
the atomred instruction is scheduled for warp-level reduction. To perform warp-level reduction, we must first identify
which threads update the same parameter (i.e., memory location). To do this, we leverage the same address coalescing
unit for generating coalesced addresses for memory transactions to generate a thread mask. Threads marked in the mask
are threads that update the same parameter. This thread mask
and memory addresses generated by the coalescing unit are
sent to the reduction unit to perform warp-level reduction.
ARC Reduction Unit. The reduction unit performs warplevel reductions by serially aggregating atomic add instructions from each transaction and then issuing a single atomic
add request to the memory interface (shown in Figure 12).
The thread masks and memory addresses sent by the ARC
scheduler are used to serially fetch values 1 to be reduced
from the register file and accumulate the result 2 3 . Finally, the sum and the thread mask are used to generate a
new atomic transaction, which is issued as a normal atomic
update 4 to be processed by the L2 ROP units. We add a
dedicated FPU per sub-core in the reduction unit to perform the warp-level reduction. Existing FPUs could be used;
however, it might be challenging to re-design the 32-lanewide pipeline to perform serial reduction. Instead, dedicated
per-sub-core FPUs have low area overheads (§5.4).
5.2

Atomic Additions and Commutativity

ARC-HW assumes that the atomic add operations are commutative, i.e., the order with which the addition operations
to the same memory location are performed does not affect

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

the result. Thus, the proposed atomred instruction does not
provide any ordering guarantees and should only be used for
commutative atomic additions. For the differentiable rendering workloads, we find that all atomic operations are commutative. We note that floating point additions may produce
slightly different results based on the order of operations, but
differential rendering workloads, similar to machine learning workloads [84], are resilient to these small errors. Thus,
the baseline differentiable rendering applications are also
written without imposing any order in the atomic additions.
5.3

GPUs: RTX 4090 includes 76 billion transistors, thus ARC
would incur a very modest area overhead of ∼ 0.047%.
5.5

Design of ARC-SW

ARC-SW is exposed to the programmer as a function call
that is invoked during gradient computation, directly replacing the atomic instructions in Figure 5 (lines 12-14) and is
called by all threads. The function’s prototype is provided in
Figure 13. It takes as input the primitive to be updated by the
thread, the primitive’s parameters, and the gradients generated by the calling thread for all the primitive’s parameters.

Coherence and Consistency Considerations

ARC does not locally buffer any memory locations, but
only partially aggregates atomic updates at the SM registers.
These updates are not buffered —once the additions across
the threads in a warp are reduced, the aggregated atomic
update is sent to the L2 ROP units to update the memory
location. For the locally aggregated values in the ARC reduction units to be visible to the rest of the GPU, GPU coherence
protocols (e.g., [62, 86, 91]) must be updated to include ARC
reduction units. In differentiable rendering workloads, the
same data is never read and updated across multiple SMs
concurrently. Thus, it will not add significant overhead. However, for other GPU workloads with different access patterns,
the coherence protocols may incur additional overheads.
We assume that all code is data race-free with the SC-forHRF [51] consistency model (similar to prior works [30, 32]).
We assume all uses of the proposed atomred instruction are
commutative and relaxed, and the output is not being used
to influence the control flow of the program. Additionally,
we assume that if any kernel leverages ARC, the memory addresses accessed atomically are always accessed atomically
within the same kernel (i.e. respects strong atomicity [24, 30]
within a kernel). Differentiable rendering workloads respect
strong atomicity in the gradient computation kernel, as all
gradient updates are atomic and there are no accesses to the
gradients that are non-atomic within the gradient computation kernel. If a kernel that leverages ARC violates strong
atomicity, no guarantee is provided by ARC regarding the
ordering between atomred and non-atomic requests.
5.4

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Area Overhead

ARC introduces control logic in the frontend to process the
atomred instruction, and control logic in the scheduler to
determine the stall status of the LSU. In the reduction unit,
ARC only introduces a floating-point unit (FPU) per subcore for the reduction computation, and a few registers to
store inputs and accumulate results. We use Yosys [16] to
evaluate this area overhead, which is estimated under 70𝐾
transistors per FPU. In a GPU with 128 SMs and 4 sub-cores
per SM (as in NVIDIA RTX 4090), ARC introduces 128 ×
4 × 70𝐾 = 35840𝐾 additional transistors. Since ARC does
not require any additional SRAM buffer, the area overhead
is small compared to the total transistor count of modern

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

// Input: primitive index, pointers to parameter
// gradients, values to be accumulated,
// balancing threshold
template<typename ATOM_T>
void reduce_arc(int idx, ATOM_T** ptr,
ATOM_T *val, int num_params,int balance_thr){
... <balanced reduction implementation>
}

Figure 13. Function prototype of ARC-SW.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

/* balanced reduction implementation */
// when num. of active threads exceeds threshold,
// do butterfly or serialized reduction
int num_active_threads = __popc(__match(idx));
if (num_active_threads >= balance_thr){
... <serialized OR butterfly implementation>
} else {
... <perform baseline atomic add>
}

Figure 14. Dynamically determining whether to send atomic
requests to ROP units or perform warp-level reduction (§4.4).
Figure 14 shows the implementation of the balanced reduction. Each thread determines how many other threads
in the warp are updating the same primitive (done using
__match instruction [10]). If this thread count is less than
the balancing threshold, the function simply sends the baseline CUDA atomicAdd [9] (line 8), which leverages the ROP
units and does not perform warp-level reduction. Otherwise,
it performs warp reduction using either serialized reduction
(§5.5.1) or butterfly reduction (§5.5.2).
5.5.1 ARC-SW with Serialized Reduction (SW-S) If execution enters the warp reduction branch (line 6 Figure 14),
as discussed in §4.4, the warp-level reduction is performed
serially (Figure 15). For each primitive, a leader thread is
identified (active thread in the warp with the lowest lane ID,
that updates the same primitive, line 6). This thread serially
accumulates gradients across all active threads in a warp for
all the parameters (lines 10-15).
Limitations: The primary limitation is the inefficient
serial reduction with execution time proportional to the
number of active threads per primitive. This also involves
additional control flow overheads (lines 10, 12, 13, 17, 18).

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

/* serialized reduction implementation */
// a mask of warp threads updating the same primitive.
int prim_mask = __match(idx);
// thread within a warp with lowest lane id
// with the same primitive is the leader
int leader = <lowestLaneIdUpdatingSamePrimitive>
/* leader accumulates parameters from threads updating
the same primitive (threads with same prim_mask) */
for src_lane <- next_lane_id(prim_mask){
// get data from next active lane
if (laneId==leader || laneId==src_lane)
for (int i = 0; i < len; ++i)
val[i] += __shfl(val[i], src_lane);
}
// leader sends an atomicAdd per parameter
if (laneId == leader)
for (int i = 0; i < num_params; ++i)
atomicAdd(ptr[i], val[i]);

Figure 15. Serialized reduction in SMs (SW-S).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

/* butterfly reduction implementation */
// reduction only performed when all threads
// are updating the same primitive
bool all_same = __match(idx) == 0xffffffff;
if (all_same) {
// parallel butterfly reduction tree
for(int offs = 16; offs >= 1; offs /= 2)
val[i] += __shfl(val[i], offset);
// thread 0 sends an atomicAdd per reduced gradient
if (laneId == 0)
atomicAdd(ptr[i], val[i]);
} else if (was_active) {
/* if balance threshold not met or bfly reduction
ineligible, do baseline atomicadd */
for (int i = 0; i < num_params; ++i)
atomicAdd(ptr[i], val[i]);
}

Figure 16. Butterfly reduction in SMs (SW-B).
5.5.2 ARC-SW with Butterfly Reduction (SW-B) As
discussed in §3.1, over 99% of warps in many workloads have
all active threads update the same primitive’s parameters. In
these cases, a parallelized reduction tree can be used for fast
warp-level reduction. Figure 16 presents our implementation.
We propose an efficient implementation that requires (1) all
threads in a warp update the same primitive (line 4), and
(2) all threads actively participate in the reduction. The programmer can use SW-B only if the first condition is met. To
ensure all threads participate in the reduction, the previously
inactive threads must now be made to generate zero value
gradient updates. A was_active flag is set to false for these
updates. If condition (1) is not met, atomic add operations
are used for reduction (line 16-17). Otherwise, a butterfly
reduction is performed using shfl instructions (line 8-9).
Limitations: SW-B adds redundant computation by making inactive threads perform zero value gradient updates,
making reduction for warps with many inactive threads inefficient. Using SW-B also requires changes to the kernel
code shown with an example in Figure 17, where the code is

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

transformed to ensure all threads participate in the reduction.
This transformation can be non-trivial in some applications.
1: function GradComputeBFLY(prims_per_thread)
2:
tid = thread_idx
3:
prims_per_thread = primitives[tid]
4:
for p in prims_per_thread do
5:
was_active = true;
⊲ active by default
6:
if cond1 then
7:
was_active = false;
⊲ Don’t skip, mark inactive
8:
end if
9:
...
10:
if cond2 then
11:
was_active = false;
⊲ Don’t skip, mark inactive
12:
end if
13:
...
14:
if not was_active then
15:
grad𝑥 1,...𝑥 𝑁 = 0
⊲ Inactive, assign zero gradients
16:
end if
17:
grad_ptrs = array[p.grad𝑥 1,...𝑥 𝑁 ]
18:
grad_vals = array[grad𝑥 1,...𝑥 𝑁 ]
19:
REDUCE_ARC _BFLY(p, g_ptrs, g_vals, N, was_active)
20:
end for
21: end function

Figure 17. Outline of a modified gradient computation kernel (Figure 5) that integrates the SW-B primitive.
5.5.3 Determining Balancing Threshold The balancing
threshold significantly impacts speedups (evaluated in §7.2)
and needs to be tuned for best results. The balancing threshold has only 32 possible values (0 − 31), and the gradient
compute kernel is called 100000s of times during training.
Thus, we present a simple method to tune the threshold
automatically: We execute one iteration of the gradient computation kernel using all 32 values of the threshold and select
the value that provides the largest speedup. We repeat this
profiling every 𝑁 iteration (2000 in our evaluation). This
profiling step adds a negligible amount of overhead, as the
number of profiling iterations is significantly fewer than the
number of training iterations.
5.6

Applicability to Other Workloads

Important deep learning and graph analytics applications are
also bottlenecked by a large number of atomic requests [32].
Unlike differentiable rendering workloads, however, these
workloads have more irregular memory accesses, and thus
exhibit a low degree of intra-warp locality between the addresses updated atomically by threads of a warp. For example,
we profile the pagerank workload from the Pannotia GPGPU
benchmark [27], implemented as a strongly atomic kernel.
We find that although 89.2% of global memory accesses that
reach the L2 are global atomics, fewer than 0.1% of warps
have all active threads atomically updating the same address
(i.e., low intra-warp locality). Compared to this, differentiable
rendering workloads have a very high intra-warp locality
that we primarily leverage with ARC (§3.1 Observation 1),
where on average 99% of the warps have all active threads
atomically updating the same memory location. Thus, ARC

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Methodology

Evaluation Platform. We implement and evaluate ARCSW on a x86_64 Linux system with an Intel Core i9-13900KF
CPU and the NVIDIA RTX4090 and RTX3060 GPUs. We
model and evaluate ARC-HW using the GPGPU-Sim simulator [58] with the RTX4090 and RTX3060 GPU configurations
(shown in Table 1). We measure the energy consumption
using pyNVML [1, 4] and pyRAPL [8].
Table 1. Simulated GPU configurations
SM Resources
Shader Core
4090-Sim
Cache Model
DRAM
SM Resources
Shader Core
3060-Sim
Cache Model
DRAM

128 SMs, 32768 Registers, 176 ROPs
2.24GHz; 4 sub-cores per SM
128KB L1 per SM, 72MB L2
12-channel; 16-bank; 24GB GDDR5
28 SMs, 32768 Registers, 48 ROPs
1.32GHz; 4 sub-cores per SM
128KB L1 per SM, 3MB L2
12-channel; 16-bank; 12GB GDDR5

Table 2. Workloads and datasets.
Workloads
3DGS (3D)
NvDiff (NV)
pulsar (PS)

Dataset Identifier (Dataset Name)
LE, SH (NerfSynthetic - Lego, Ship [76]),
PR, DR (DB COLMAP - Playroom, DrJohnson [18]),
TK, TA (Tanks&Temples - Truck, Train [61]),
BB, SP (Keenan Crane - Bob, Spot [31]),
LE, SH (NerfSynthetic - Lego, Ship [76])
SS, SL (Synthetic Spheres - Small, Large)

Workloads. We evaluate ARC using 3 widely used rasterbased differentiable rendering applications: (i) 3DGS [55] represents scenes with a set of 3D Gaussians; (ii) NvDiffRec
[80] includes various differentiable rendering tasks, and we
use differentiable rendering to learn the parameters of specular cubemap texture from a set of mesh images, and (iii)
Pulsar [64] represents the scene with a set of spheres and
an efficient sphere rasterizer with a widely-used implementation in Pytorch3D [83]. We use the datasets listed in Table 2.
For pulsar, we use two synthesized datasets comprising 3D
spheres (PS-SS and PS-SL).

7

7.1

4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

PHI

LAB

LAB-ideal

ARC-HW

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 18. Gradient computation speedup of ARC-HW, PHI,
LAB and LAB-ideal on 3060-Sim, normalized to baseline.

Evaluation

We evaluate both the software implementation (ARC-SW)
and the hardware implementation (ARC-HW). The baseline
configuration sends all atomic requests to the ROP units
using the atomicAdd primitive [9]. For ARC-SW, we evaluate two different configurations: (i) SW-B-X: an implementation of ARC-SW using butterfly reduction, with balancing
threshold 𝑋 . (ii) SW-S-X: an implementation of ARC-SW using serialized reduction, with balancing threshold 𝑋 . We
refer to the configurations of SW-B-X and SW-S-X with the
best-performing balancing threshold as SW-B and SW-S, respectively. We compare both configurations against CCCL,
which uses the NVIDIA CCCL library [14, 15] to perform

Performance analysis of ARC-HW.

Figures 18 and 19 depict the speedup achieved by ARC-HW,
LAB, LAB-ideal and PHI on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim, normalized to the baseline. Figures 20 and 21 depict the reduction
in shader stalls due to atomic operations over ARC-HW, LAB
and LAB-ideal on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim, normalized to
the baseline. We make four observations:

Speedup

6

warp-level reduction. We test software approaches on real
hardware: (i) 4090: NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU and (ii) 3060:
NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU. Each result is the arithmetic mean
of 10 runs of the same configuration to ensure speedups are
statistically significant. For ARC-HW, we compare ARC-HW
against LAB [32], the closest prior work that dynamically
partitions the local L1/shared memory SRAM to buffer and
aggregate atomic requests. We use two LAB configurations:
(i) LAB-ideal: an idealized implementation of LAB. We dedicate an additional and separate SRAM buffer with the same
capacity as the L1/shared memory SRAM that does not incur contention in the LSU, and we assume no tag lookup
overheads, MSHR queuing delays, etc. Commutative atomic
requests are sent to LAB-ideal’s dedicated SRAM buffer, and
other requests are sent to L1/shared memory. (ii) LAB: an
implementation of LAB where the L1/shared memory SRAM
is partitioned between atomic and non-atomic requests (no
additional SRAM). Differentiable rendering workloads use
some shared memory, thus there is less available L1/shared
memory SRAM that can be allocated to LAB. The partition
size for LAB was chosen to be the empirically best performing for each workload. Additionally, we compare against
PHI [78], which buffers and aggregates atomic updates in
the L1 caches. We evaluate ARC-HW, LAB-ideal, LAB and PHI
on both simulator configurations: 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim.

Speedup

cannot provide performance benefits to these workloads.
When ARC is not used, there are no performance overheads
for those workloads as the ARC reduction unit is bypassed.

5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

8.59

PHI

LAB

LAB-ideal

ARC-HW

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 19. Gradient computation speedup of ARC-HW, PHI,
LAB and LAB-ideal on 4090-Sim, normalized to baseline.
First, ARC-HW demonstrates significant performance improvements, achieving 2.06× speedup on average (up to
8.59×) on 4090-Sim and 1.73× speedup on average (up to
3.77×) on 3060-Sim. Figures 20 and 21 demonstrate 2.43×
and 2.28× average reduction in shader atomic stalls on 4090-Sim

LAB-ideal

ARC-HW

Atomic Stall
Reduction

10.34

9.91

LAB

LAB-ideal

ARC-HW

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 21. Reduction in shader atomic stalls on 4090-Sim,
normalized to baseline.
and 3060-Sim, respectively, as a result of ARC-HW significantly reducing the atomic memory transactions. Second,
LAB-ideal achieves an average speedup of 1.40× and 1.20×
on average (up to 3.05× and 1.56×) on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim,
respectively, which are lower compared to the speedups
achieved by ARC-HW. ARC-HW’s performance benefits over
LAB come from (a) higher atomic processing throughput as
ARC performs reduction at each of the 4 sub-cores, rather
than just the overall core, (b) there is no eviction/capacity
issue in buffers since the reduction is only intra-warp and
happens directly in the registers, and (c) further improved
throughput by distributing atomic computation between the
ROP units and the sub-cores. Thus, ARC-HW is more effective
in reducing the atomic stalls as demonstrated in Figures 20
and 21, where LAB-ideal achieves 1.43× and 1.19× average
reduction in shader atomic stalls on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim,
respectively. Third, LAB-ideal marginally outperforms LAB
by 1.05× on average on both 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim. This
is because of the smaller space available for atomic buffering and the slightly higher L1 miss rate from the reduced
capacity for the non-atomic requests. Fourth, PHI provides
only small performance improvements (1.01× and 1.03× on
average on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim) over the baseline. This
approach buffers atomic updates at L1 caches and does not
perform warp-level reduction at the sub-cores. Thus, a large
number of atomic updates overwhelms the LSU when buffering updates, and does not alleviate the atomic stalls in these
workloads. Moreover, PHI performs L1 address lookups for
each atomic operation, which incurs additional overheads
and also impacts the performance of non-atomic operations.
We conclude that ARC-HW is an efficient approach to accelerate differentiable rendering applications by alleviating the
overheads of atomic operations in gradient computations.
7.2

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

4090

3060

4090

3060

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 20. Reduction in shader atomic stalls on 3060-Sim,
normalized to baseline.
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

End-to-end
Speedup

LAB

5.66

Software-only Approaches

Performance Analysis. Figure 22 shows the speedup of
ARC-SW for end-to-end runtime (including the forward pass)
and for gradient computation alone on real hardware, normalized to the baseline. We make two observations.

Gradient
Speedup

5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

Figure 22. End-to-end and gradient computation speedup
on 4090 and 3060 with ARC-SW, normalized to baseline.
First, both SW techniques, SW-B and SW-S, significantly
outperform the baseline on average on both GPUs. For the
gradient computation, ARC-SW achieves an average speedup
of 2.44× (up to 5.7×) on 4090, and 1.74× (up to 3.27×) on
3060. For the entire differentiable rendering pipeline, ARC-SW
achieves an average speedup of 1.41× on 4090 (up to 2.4×),
and 1.21× (up to 1.71×) on 3060.
Second, we observe higher speedups on 4090, compared
to that of 3060, because the atomic processing bottleneck
is more pronounced in 4090 which has a lower ROP to SM
ratio (128 SMs and 176 ROP units in 4090 versus 28 SMs
and 48 ROPs in 3060). Third, SW-B performs as well as or
much better than SW-S, which performs the reduction serially. However, there are some workloads (PS-SS and PS-SL)
that cannot use SW-B, because it was difficult to eliminate
thread divergence, the key requirement for butterfly reduction (§5.5.2). Fourth, we observe significant performance
speedups on 3D-PR and 3D-DR, because the datasets PR, DR
are large-scale, photorealistic scenes that require many more
geometric primitives (Gaussians for 3DGS) for accurate scene
representation compared to smaller scenes. Therefore, a
larger number of parameters needs to be atomically updated
during gradient computation, making the atomic bottleneck
more pronounced. Finally, we observe smaller end-to-end
speedups in NV and PS. NV has much fewer warp stalls compared to 3D in the baseline application (Figure 8). This leads
to a less contended LSU, which diminishes the speedups
achieved by ARC-SW. In PS, although the LSU is heavily contended in gradient computation (Figure 8), the gradient computation is not the main bottleneck (Figure 4).
Speedup

Atomic Stall
Reduction

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

SW-S-0
SW-B-0

SW-S-8
SW-B-8

SW-S-16
SW-B-16

SW-S-24
SW-B-24

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH PS-SS PS-SL gmean

Figure 23. Sensitivity of SW-S and SW-B to balancing threshold 𝑋 . SW-B cannot be used for PS-SS and PS-SL.
Impact of the Balancing Threshold. In Figure 23, we
depict the sensitivity of SW-S and SW-B to the balancing

Scoreboard Stall

Other

Speedup

LSU Stall

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH PS-SS PS-SL gmean

Figure 24. Breakdown of warp stall cycles during gradient
computation using ARC-SW on 4090 (left) and 3060 (right).
threshold 𝑋 for gradient computation on 4090. We make two
observations. First, the best-performing balancing threshold
varies across workloads/datasets. For most workloads, we
achieve the highest speedup when 𝑋 is set to a value that
ensures that the atomic updates are distributed between the
ROP units and the SMs for both SW-S and SW-B. Setting 𝑋 to
be 0 or 24 leads to contention in either the sub-core reduction
unit or the ROP units, respectively. Second, in NV and PS
workloads, choosing sub-optimal balancing thresholds can
result in slowdowns: in some compute-bound workloads,
the additional instructions required can incur significant
overheads. In these cases, balancing thresholds that favor
the ROP unit should be chosen.
Elimination of LSU Stalls. To better understand the observed performance benefits, we measure the number of
stall cycles per instruction in Figure 24 using the NVIDIA
NSIGHT Compute [7] profiler. We find significantly fewer
mean stalls per instruction across all workloads compared to
baseline (Figure 8): 10.3 cycles versus 38.3 cycles on average
thanks to significantly fewer stalls in atomics (LSU stalls).
Comparing ARC-SW to ARC-HW. We evaluate ARC-SW
in the simulator to compare it against ARC-HW. Figure 25
depicts the speedup of ARC-HW normalized to ARC-SW. We
find that ARC-HW consistently outperforms ARC-SW by
1.13× on average (up to 1.29×) on 4090-Sim, and 1.14× on
average (up to 1.26×) on 3060-Sim. ARC-HW is more efficient since it does not incur the overhead of many additional
instructions, control flow, and redundant computation.
Speedup

1.6
1.4

4090-Sim ARC-SW
3060-Sim ARC-SW

4090-Sim ARC-HW
3060-Sim ARC-HW

1.2

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

ARC-SW

CCCL

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH PS-SS PS-SL gmean

Figure 26. Gradient computation speedup of ARC-SW over
CCCL on 4090, normalized to the baseline.
(up to 1.78×) across all workloads. CCCL requires all threads
in the same warp to be active (§4.2), but the gradient computation steps of raster-based differentiable methods have
dynamic conditions that often do not satisfy this requirement
(§3.1). Moreover, ARC-SW effectively distributes reduction between SMs and ROP units (§4.4). (2) CCCL yields marginal
performance improvements on NvDiff workloads because
NvDiff has many inactive threads in the most warps. Thus,
CCCL fails to capture most reduction opportunities.
7.3

Energy analysis

We evaluate energy efficiency of ARC-SW and ARC-HW. For
ARC-SW, we measure energy consumption on real GPUs, depicted in Figure 27 and normalized to baseline. We observe
that ARC-SW reduces energy consumption by 2.8× on average
on 4090 and by 1.7× on average on 3060. This is due to the
significantly faster execution as well as the fewer memory
requests (atomic requests) from the SMs to the ROP units
which leads to less energy consumption at the interconnect.
For ARC-HW, we measure its energy reduction in the simulator with different configurations, depicted in Figure 28
and normalized to the simulator baseline. We observe that
ARC-HW significantly reduces energy consumption by 3.9×
on average on 4090-Sim and 2.55× on average on 3060-Sim.
Normalized Energy
Reduction

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

9.0

ARC-SW 3060
ARC-SW 4090

6.0
3.0
0.0

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 27. Normalized energy reduction in gradient computation with ARC-SW on 4090 and 3060.

1.0
0.8

Normalized Energy
Reduction

Warp Stall Cycle

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 25. Gradient computation speedup of ARC-HW and
ARC-SW in the simulator, normalized to ARC-SW.
Comparing Against Software Warp-level Reduction.
Figure 26 compares ARC-SW over NVIDIA CCCL library [14],
the state-of-art library for software warp-level reduction. We
note that significant engineering efforts were needed to make
CCCL work correctly for these workloads. We present the
gradient computation speedup of ARC-SW and CCCL normalized to the atomicAdd baseline on 4090.
We make two observations: (1) ARC-SW outperforms CCCL
significantly, achieving 1.58× higher speedup on average

15.0

ARC-HW 3060-Sim

12.0

ARC-HW 4090-Sim

9.0
6.0
3.0
0.0

3D-LE 3D-SH 3D-PR 3D-DR 3D-TK 3D-TA NV-BB NV-SP NV-LE NV-SH gmean

Figure 28. Normalized energy reduction in gradient computation with ARC-HW on 4090-Sim and 3060-Sim.

8

Related Work

To our knowledge, this is the first work to (i) characterize
emerging differentiable rendering workloads and identify
atomic operations to be a key bottleneck; and (ii) propose
an efficient method to leverage warp-level reduction and

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

existing atomic units to accelerate atomic processing in GPUs
for raster-based differentiable rendering.
Differentiable Rendering Techniques. Prior works propose software techniques [29, 43, 68, 79, 93] or hardware
accelerators [44, 66, 69, 102] to accelerate training and/or
rendering for NeRFs [76, 79]. These works target one class of
differentiable rendering applications in which the primary
bottleneck is the large number of computations and memory
accesses performed. Instead, our work targets raster-based
differentiable rendering methods that significantly reduce
the number of computations needed, thus being a more efficient approach than NeRFs. These methods are highly bottlenecked by atomic operations during training, a problem
that is not addressed by prior work. Applying ARC in NeRFs
would not provide significant speedups, because (i) for NeRFs,
atomics operations only constitute a secondary bottleneck,
and (ii) NeRFs have low intra-warp locality in atomic updates (the key insight that ARC leverages) as they typically
use hash tables/octtrees/etc. to store learned parameters that
lead to more irregular access patterns.
Efficient Atomic Operations in GPUs. Prior works [19,
40, 85, 91, 92, 94] propose cache coherence protocols that can
accelerate atomic requests in GPUs. However, they require
non-trivial changes to GPU cache coherence protocols at
the L1. Atomic operations can instead be implemented with
Remote Memory Operations (RMOs) [45, 47, 60, 88, 89, 98],
which is hardware support for atomic operations: this involves using arithmetic logic near shared caches/main memory to perform efficient atomic operations without complex
changes to cache coherence protocols and is used in modern
GPUs [99]. However, as demonstrated in this work (§3.2),
this can lead to bottlenecks at the LSU and memory subsystem due to high atomic traffic in workloads where a large
number of threads perform atomic operations. To address
this bottleneck, prior works propose to buffer atomic operations in local SRAM in each SM and thus reduce the
contention near the L2 atomic units: LAB [32] dynamically
reserves a partition of the L1/shared memory SRAM in each
SM to aggregate the atomic requests. PHI [78] aggregates
commutative atomic requests at the L1 cache to reduce memory traffic. These works demonstrate significant speedups
in applications with a large amount of atomic traffic, such
as graph applications, histograms, and ML training. These
works, however, do not fully leverage the high intra-warp
atomic locality seen in differentiable rendering workloads.
We quantitatively compare against LAB [32] and PHI [78] in
§7.1 and demonstrate that ARC performs better by leveraging
intra-warp locality in atomic updates to enable warp-level
reduction using registers in the GPU sub-cores. ARC significantly reduces the number of atomic updates sent to the
LSU and memory hierarchy, and our dynamic scheduling
scheme (§4.3) leverages both the ROP units and the SMs to
enable high atomic processing throughput. DAB [30] aims
to achieve deterministic atomic execution by buffering and

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

fusing atomic requests in dedicated atomic buffers at each
SM. However, scheduling atomic operations with deterministic orderings (determinism-aware schedulers) introduces
additional overheads that can lead to > 20% slowdowns over
non-deterministic application baselines, as reported by DAB.
Software-based Warp-level Reduction. Software frameworks and libraries [2, 14, 15, 34, 38] provide functions to perform warp-level and block-level reduction. These libraries
require all threads of the warp to be active for reduction
computation. ARC-SW efficiently performs updates to all
parameters associated with a primitive, even when a subset
of warp threads is active. These libraries also do not use both
the SM and L2 atomic units to increase atomic processing
throughput. We compare ARC with CCCL library in §7.2.
In-Register Parameter Caching. Prior works leverage
GPU register files as additional on-chip memory to cache
partial updates of model parameters and exploit data locality
[33, 35, 53, 59, 111, 113]. These works demonstrate speedups
from reducing off-chip memory accesses. ARC also uses register files to temporarily store parameter updates. However,
unlike these works that primarily optimize for memory loads,
ARC is an atomic reduction technique that aims at alleviating the significant memory traffic from atomic operations
which can constitute a significant bottleneck in differentiable
rendering workloads. ARC is designed to leverage any intrawarp locality in atomic updates by using registers to perform
atomic reductions. Thus, instead of buffering for reuse, ARC
requires the addition of an FPU to perform the sub-core
reduction of atomic updates. This reduces the amount of
atomic contention at the L2 ROP units. The ARC scheduler
also dynamically detects threads eligible for reduction and
schedules atomic operations between the ARC reduction unit
and the ROP units to achieve optimal atomic throughput.

9

Conclusion

We introduce ARC, a novel primitive that enables fast processing of atomic reduction operations in applications that
(1) generate a massive number of atomic requests and (2)
have many threads within each warp atomically updating a
common parameter. We demonstrate that both the hardwaresoftware primitive ARC-HW and the software-only primitive
ARC-SW can effectively alleviate the atomic processing bottleneck and accelerate raster-based differentiable rendering
workloads, which is an important emerging class of applications in visual computing. ARC is a general atomic primitive
that can also be used to accelerate other workloads with
similar atomic characteristics.

Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback and the
members of the embARC research group for all their help and
the stimulating research environment they provide. This research was supported by the Sony Research Award program
and NSERC Alliance.

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

A

Artifact Appendix

A.1

Abstract

This Artifact Appendix describes how to reproduce the ARCSW end-to-end speedup results in §7.2 (Fig. 22 and Fig. 26).
Since ARC-SW is a modular extension to the gradient computation kernel, it is integrated into the existing code bases of
the threedifferentiable rendering applications we use in the
paper (3DGS, NvDiff, pulsar). The 3 different applications
have different software dependencies, setup workflows and
execution environments and could not be condensed into
one set of instructions and submission, thus we present the
workflow and setup to reproduce the results for the 3DGS
workloads which includes the majority of the workloads in
our evaluation and the workloads which achieve the highest
speedups with our approach. 3DGS is one of the state-of-theart and widely-used raster-based differentiable rendering
methods (described in §2.3).
The code provided in the artifact is developed based on the
original 3DGS’s open-source implementation. The training
process contains model evaluation checkpoints for correctness checks and end-to-end training time at the end as performance measurement. A successful training process with
either ARC-SW variant (ARC-SW-B or ARC-SW-S) should
report similar Peak-Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (PSNR↑) and L1
loss (L1↓) values, while achieving similar speedups. Note
that since the training process is stochastic, both PSNR and
L1 values will have minor differences across runs even with
the same configuration.
To facilitate the AE process, we provide a tarball file, which
contains the ARC-SW source code, experiment datasets, and
the automated workflow scripts to execute the 3DGS training.
A.2

Artifact check-list (meta-information)

• Compilation: GCC 12.1.0, public, not included; NVIDIA CUDA
Compiler (NVCC) from CUDA Toolkit 12.2, public, not included.
• Data set: DB COLMAP, Tanks and Temples, NeRF Synthetic. All
are publicly available and included.
• Run-time environment: Linux x86_64. Requires CUDA 12.2,
Python 3.11 and Conda. Root access only required for CUDA
installation.
• Hardware: NVIDIA RTX 4090 and RTX 3060 GPUs to accurately
reproduce all results. NVIDIA GPUs with a minimum compute
capability of 8.6 and at least 8GB GPU memory may also be used
to validate the results.
• Run-time state: No other GPU-intensive task should be running
during the AE process.
• Metrics: Correctness metrics (model quality): Peak-Signal-toNoise-Ratio (PSNR↑), L1 loss (L1↓). Performance metric: end-toend runtime.
• Output: A CSV file containing all configurations and raw metrics,
and a PNG figure that reconstructs Fig. 22 and Fig. 26 in the paper.
• Experiments: Install required run-time environment, fetch and
extract the provided tarball file
• How much disk space required (approximately)?: 10GB disk
space required.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

• How much time is needed to prepare workflow (approximately)?: About 10 minutes (download time excluded).
• How much time is needed to complete experiments (approximately)?: About 2 hours on a system with RTX 4090.
• Publicly available?: Yes.
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: Gaussian-Splatting License (the same license as the original 3DGS)
• Archived (provide DOI)?: 10.5281/zenodo.14053431

A.3

Description

A.3.1 How to access Download the tarball file scar_ae.tar.gz
from Zenodo: 10.5281/zenodo.14053431
A.3.2 Hardware dependencies AE should be run on a
host machine with NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU and/or NVIDIA
RTX 3060 GPU. To reproduce all results, it is required to run
AE once on each GPU, as Fig. 22 contains results collected
from both RTX 4090 and RTX 3060. On a platform with
multiple GPUs installed, our script allows for the selection
of a specific CUDA device to run the AE on.
If RTX 4090 and RTX 3060 are unavailable on any AE
platform, ARC-SW may also be evaluated on a different
NVIDIA GPU with a minimum compute capability of 8.6
and at least 8GB GPU memory. In this case, the observed
speedups may show different trends compared to Fig. 22 and
Fig. 26.
A.3.3 Software dependencies The verified operating systems and dependencies are listed below:
• Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS or Manjaro 24.1
• Python 3.11
• CUDA Toolkit 12.2
• GCC 12.1.0 or GCC 12.3.0
• Conda installation
A.3.4 Data sets We evaluate across three publicly available datasets, listed below:
• DB COLMAP - Playroom, DrJohnson
• Tanks and Temples - Truck, Train
• Nerf Synthetic - Lego, Ship
A.4

Installation

Assuming the provided tarball file scar_ae.tar.gz has been
downloaded and all software dependencies have been installed, please execute the following commands in sequence
to install the environment:
1
2
3
4

A.5

$ tar -zxvf scar_ae.tar.gz
$ cd scar_ae
$ conda env create --file environment.yml
$ conda activate scar_ae

Experiment workflow

We provide a single Python script that runs all AE experiments and produces a single CSV file that contains the raw
data required to reproduce Fig. 22 and Fig. 26. To run this

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

script, execute the following command (continuing from
installation):
1

$ python run_ae.py 0

This script uses CUDA device 0 by default. If the AE platform has more than one NVIDIA GPU installed, the argument
0 may be changed to the target CUDA device ID to run the
AE on.
A.6

Evaluation and expected results

When run_ae.py finishes successfully, the output CSV file
ae_result.csv will contain raw experiment results from all
combinations of the three parameters:
4 backward (gradient computation) kernel implementations:
• The original 3DGS implementation (baseline)
• ARC-SW-S (§5.5.1)
• ARC-SW-B (§5.5.2)
• CCCL library implementation (§7.2)
6 workloads from 3 datasets:
• NeRF Synthetic Ship
• NeRF Synthetic Lego
• DB COLMAP Playroom
• DB COLMAP DrJohnson
• Tanks and Temples Truck
• Tanks and Temples Train

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

4 balancing_thresholds (§4.4): an integer selected among 0, 8,
16, 24, 32. ARC-SW warp reduction is performed if and only
if the number of active threads is greater than or equal to
balancing_threshold. balancing_threshold has no effect when
bw_implementation is set to org or CCCL.
There are 8 columns in the CSV file, listed below:
• BW Implementation
• Balance Threshold
• Dataset
• Train PSNR↑
• Train L1↓
• Test PSNR↑
• Test L1↓
• End-to-end Training Time
Each row in the CSV file corresponds to the results of
one specific experiment configuration. We expect the PSNR
and L1 values to be similar across all experiments on the
same dataset. We additionally provide a Python script to
automatically generate a figure that reconstructs both Fig. 22
and Fig. 26 from the CSV file, which can be run with the
following command after the CSV file has been successfully
generated:
1

$ python gen_ae_figs.py

We expect that the generated figure scar_ae_fig.png should
depict results similar to Fig. 22 and Fig. 26 with minor differences, primarily due to the stochastic nature of the application, system noises and different testing platforms.

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

References
[1] 2012. PyNVML. https://pythonhosted.org/nvidia-ml-py/.
[2] 2014. Faster Parallel Reductions on Kepler. https://developer.nvidia.
com/blog/faster-parallel-reductions-kepler/.
[3] 2017.
NVIDIA TESLA V100 GPU ARCHITECTURE.
https://images.nvidia.com/content/volta-architecture/pdf/voltaarchitecture-whitepaper.pdf.
[4] 2017. NVML GPU Power Measurement. https://github.com/kajalv/
nvml-power.
[5] 2021.
NVIDIA AMPERE GA102 GPU ARCHITECTURE
WHITEPAPER.
https://images.nvidia.com/aem-dam/enzz/Solutions/geforce/ampere/pdf/NVIDIA-ampere-GA102-GPUArchitecture-Whitepaper-V1.pdf.
NVIDIA ADA GPU ARCHITECTURE.
https:
[6] 2023.
//images.nvidia.com/aem-dam/Solutions/geforce/ada/nvidiaada-gpu-architecture.pdf.
[7] 2023. NVIDIA Nsight Compute. https://developer.nvidia.com/nsightcompute.
[8] 2023. PyRAPL. https://github.com/powerapi-ng/pyRAPL.
[9] 2024. CUDA C++ Programming Guide - 7.14. Atomic Functions. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/
index.html#atomic-functions.
[10] 2024. CUDA C++ Programming Guide - 7.20. Warp Match Functions. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/
index.html#warp-match-functions.
[11] 2024. CUDA C++ Programming Guide - 7.22 Warp Shuffle Functions. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/
#warp-shuffle-functions.
[12] 2024. DISTWAR repository. https://github.com/Accelsnow/gaussiansplatting-distwar.
[13] 2024. Nsight Compute Documentation. https://docs.nvidia.com/
nsight-compute/ProfilingGuide/index.html#metrics-guide.
[14] 2024. NVIDIA cccl library. https://github.com/NVIDIA/nccl.
[15] 2024. NVIDIA cub library. https://nvlabs.github.io/cub/.
[16] 2024. Yosys Open SYnthesis Suite :: About. https://yosyshq.net/
yosys/
[17] Tor M Aamodt, Wilson Wai Lun Fung, Timothy G Rogers, and Margaret Martonosi. 2018. General-purpose graphics processor architectures. Springer.
[18] Josh Abramson, Arun Ahuja, Iain Barr, Arthur Brussee, Federico
Carnevale, Mary Cassin, Rachita Chhaparia, Stephen Clark, Bogdan
Damoc, Andrew Dudzik, et al. 2020. Imitating interactive intelligence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05672 (2020).
[19] Johnathan Alsop, Marc S Orr, Bradford M Beckmann, and David A
Wood. 2016. Lazy release consistency for GPUs. In 2016 49th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
IEEE, 1–14.
[20] Edward Angel. 1996. Interactive Computer Graphics: A top-down
approach with OpenGL. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.,
Inc.
[21] Sai Praveen Bangaru, Lifan Wu, Tzu-Mao Li, Jacob Munkberg, Gilbert
Bernstein, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Frédo Durand, Aaron Lefohn, and
Yong He. 2023. Slang. d: Fast, modular and differentiable shader
programming. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42, 6 (2023),
1–28.
[22] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan,
and Peter Hedman. 2022. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased
neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 5470–5479.
[23] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan,
and Peter Hedman. 2023. Zip-nerf: Anti-aliased grid-based neural
radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision. 19697–19705.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[24] Colin Blundell, E Christopher Lewis, and Milo MK Martin. 2006. Subtleties of transactional memory atomicity semantics. IEEE Computer
Architecture Letters 5, 2 (2006), 17–17.
[25] Ang Cao and Justin Johnson. 2023. Hexplane: A fast representation
for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 130–141.
[26] David Charatan, Sizhe Lester Li, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Vincent
Sitzmann. 2024. pixelsplat: 3d gaussian splats from image pairs
for scalable generalizable 3d reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
19457–19467.
[27] Shuai Che, Bradford M Beckmann, Steven K Reinhardt, and Kevin
Skadron. 2013. Pannotia: Understanding irregular GPGPU graph
applications. In 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC). IEEE, 185–195.
[28] Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su.
2022. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance fields. In European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 333–350.
[29] Zhiqin Chen, Thomas Funkhouser, Peter Hedman, and Andrea
Tagliasacchi. 2023. Mobilenerf: Exploiting the polygon rasterization
pipeline for efficient neural field rendering on mobile architectures.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 16569–16578.
[30] Yuan Hsi Chou, Christopher Ng, Shaylin Cattell, Jeremy Intan,
Matthew D Sinclair, Joseph Devietti, Timothy G Rogers, and Tor M
Aamodt. 2020. Deterministic atomic buffering. In 2020 53rd Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
IEEE, 981–995.
[31] Keenan Crane, Ulrich Pinkall, and Peter Schröder. 2013. Robust fairing
via conformal curvature flow. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
32, 4 (2013), 1–10.
[32] Preyesh Dalmia, Rohan Mahapatra, and Matthew D Sinclair. 2022.
Only buffer when you need to: Reducing on-chip gpu traffic with
reconfigurable local atomic buffers. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE,
676–691.
[33] Sina Darabi, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Negar Akbarzadeh, Joël Lindegger, Mohammad Hosseini, Jisung Park, Juan Gómez-Luna, Onur
Mutlu, and Hamid Sarbazi-Azad. 2022. Morpheus: Extending the last
level cache capacity in GPU systems using idle GPU core resources.
In 2022 55th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO). IEEE, 228–244.
[34] Simon Garcia De Gonzalo, Sitao Huang, Juan Gómez-Luna, Simon
Hammond, Onur Mutlu, and Wen-mei Hwu. 2019. Automatic generation of warp-level primitives and atomic instructions for fast and
portable parallel reduction on GPUs. In 2019 IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO). 73–84.
[35] Greg Diamos, Shubho Sengupta, Bryan Catanzaro, Mike Chrzanowski,
Adam Coates, Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, Awni Hannun, and Sanjeev
Satheesh. 2016. Persistent rnns: Stashing recurrent weights on-chip.
In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024–2033.
[36] Bardienus P Duisterhof, Zhao Mandi, Yunchao Yao, Jia-Wei Liu,
Mike Zheng Shou, Shuran Song, and Jeffrey Ichnowski. 2023. Mdsplatting: Learning metric deformation from 4d gaussians in highly
deformable scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00583 (2023).
[37] Sankeerth Durvasula, Adrian Zhao, Fan Chen, Ruofan Liang,
Pawan Kumar Sanjaya, and Nandita Vijaykumar. 2023. DISTWAR:
Fast Differentiable Rendering on Raster-based Rendering Pipelines.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05345 (2023).
[38] Ian J Egielski, Jesse Huang, and Eddy Z Zhang. 2014. Massive atomics
for massive parallelism on GPUs. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 49, 11 (2014),
93–103.
[39] Jiemin Fang, Taoran Yi, Xinggang Wang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang,
Wenyu Liu, Matthias Nießner, and Qi Tian. 2022. Fast dynamic
radiance fields with time-aware neural voxels. In SIGGRAPH Asia
2022 Conference Papers. 1–9.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[40] Sean Franey and Mikko Lipasti. 2013. Accelerating atomic operations
on GPGPUs. In 2013 Seventh IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Networks-on-Chip (NoCS). IEEE, 1–8.
[41] Linus Franke, Darius Rückert, Laura Fink, and Marc Stamminger. 2024.
TRIPS: Trilinear Point Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum. Wiley Online Library, e15012.
[42] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Giacomo Meanti, Frederik Rahbæk Warburg,
Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2023. K-planes: Explicit
radiance fields in space, time, and appearance. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
12479–12488.
[43] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2022. Plenoxels: Radiance fields
without neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 5501–5510.
[44] Yonggan Fu, Zhifan Ye, Jiayi Yuan, Shunyao Zhang, Sixu Li, Haoran
You, and Yingyan Lin. 2023. Gen-NeRF: Efficient and Generalizable
Neural Radiance Fields via Algorithm-Hardware Co-Design. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture. 1–12.
[45] Masaaki Fushimi, Takahiro Kawashima, Takafumi Nose, Nobutaka
Ihara, Shinji Sumimoto, and Naoyuki Shida. 2019. A Memory Saving Communication Method Using Remote Atomic Operations. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing in Asia-Pacific Region. 36–42.
[46] Sharath Girish, Kamal Gupta, and Abhinav Shrivastava. 2023. Eagles:
Efficient accelerated 3d gaussians with lightweight encodings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.04564 (2023).
[47] Gottlieb, Grishman, Kruskal, McAuliffe, Rudolph, and Snir. 1983. The
NYU ultracomputer—Designing an MIMD shared memory parallel
computer. IEEE Transactions on computers 100, 2 (1983), 175–189.
[48] Antoine Guédon and Vincent Lepetit. 2024. Sugar: Surface-aligned
gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruction and highquality mesh rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 5354–5363.
[49] Yong He, Kayvon Fatahalian, and Tim Foley. 2018. Slang: language
mechanisms for extensible real-time shading systems. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 4 (2018), 1–13.
[50] Peter Hedman, Pratul P Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, and Paul Debevec. 2021. Baking neural radiance fields for realtime view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision. 5875–5884.
[51] Lee Howes and Aaftab Munshi. 2015. The OpenCL specification,
version 2.0. Khronos Group (2015).
[52] Wenzel Jakob, Sébastien Speierer, Nicolas Roussel, and Delio Vicini.
2022. DR. JIT: a just-in-time compiler for differentiable rendering.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41, 4 (2022), 1–19.
[53] Hyeran Jeon, Hodjat Asghari Esfeden, Nael B Abu-Ghazaleh, Daniel
Wong, and Sindhuja Elango. 2019. Locality-aware gpu register file.
IEEE Computer Architecture Letters 18, 2 (2019), 153–156.
[54] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and Jonathon Luiten.
2024. SplaTAM: Splat Track & Map 3D Gaussians for Dense RGB-D
SLAM. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 21357–21366.
[55] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George
Drettakis. 2023. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field
rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 42, 4 (2023), 1–14.
[56] Leonid Keselman. 2023. Gaussian Representations for Differentiable
Rendering and Optimization. Ph. D. Dissertation. Carnegie Mellon
University.
[57] Leonid Keselman and Martial Hebert. 2023. Flexible Techniques
for Differentiable Rendering with 3D Gaussians. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.14737 (2023).

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

[58] Mahmoud Khairy, Zhesheng Shen, Tor M Aamodt, and Timothy G
Rogers. 2020. Accel-Sim: An extensible simulation framework for
validated GPU modeling. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 473–486.
[59] Farzad Khorasani, Hodjat Asghari Esfeden, Nael Abu-Ghazaleh, and
Vivek Sarkar. 2018. In-register parameter caching for dynamic neural nets with virtual persistent processor specialization. In 2018 51st
Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 377–389.
[60] Benjamin Klenk, Nan Jiang, Greg Thorson, and Larry Dennison. 2020.
An in-network architecture for accelerating shared-memory multiprocessor collectives. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 996–1009.
[61] Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. 2017.
Tanks and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 36, 4 (2017), 1–13.
[62] Konstantinos Koukos, Alberto Ros, Erik Hagersten, and Stefanos
Kaxiras. 2016. Building heterogeneous unified virtual memories
(uvms) without the overhead. ACM Transactions on Architecture and
Code Optimization (TACO) 13, 1 (2016), 1–22.
[63] Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. 2020. Modular Primitives for High-Performance
Differentiable Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 6 (2020).
[64] Christoph Lassner and Michael Zollhofer. 2021. Pulsar: Efficient
sphere-based neural rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 1440–1449.
[65] Verica Lazova, Vladimir Guzov, Kyle Olszewski, Sergey Tulyakov,
and Gerard Pons-Moll. 2023. Control-nerf: Editable feature volumes
for scene rendering and manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 4340–4350.
[66] Junseo Lee, Kwanseok Choi, Jungi Lee, Seokwon Lee, Joonho
Whangbo, and Jaewoong Sim. 2023. NeuRex: A Case for Neural
Rendering Acceleration. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture. 1–13.
[67] Chaojian Li, Sixu Li, Yang Zhao, Wenbo Zhu, and Yingyan Lin. 2022.
RT-NeRF: Real-Time On-Device Neural Radiance Fields Towards Immersive AR/VR Rendering. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design. 1–9.
[68] Ruilong Li, Hang Gao, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2023.
Nerfacc: Efficient sampling accelerates nerfs. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 18537–18546.
[69] Sixu Li, Chaojian Li, Wenbo Zhu, Boyang Yu, Yang Zhao, Cheng
Wan, Haoran You, Huihong Shi, and Yingyan Lin. 2023. Instant-3D:
Instant Neural Radiance Field Training Towards On-Device AR/VR
3D Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture. 1–13.
[70] Yingtai Li, Xueming Fu, Shang Zhao, Ruiyang Jin, and S Kevin Zhou.
2023. Sparse-view ct reconstruction with 3d gaussian volumetric
representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15676 (2023).
[71] Yiqing Liang, Numair Khan, Zhengqin Li, Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Douglas Lanman, James Tompkin, and Lei Xiao. 2023. GauFRe: Gaussian
Deformation Fields for Real-time Dynamic Novel View Synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11458 (2023).
[72] Jiaqi Lin, Zhihao Li, Xiao Tang, Jianzhuang Liu, Shiyong Liu, Jiayue
Liu, Yangdi Lu, Xiaofei Wu, Songcen Xu, Youliang Yan, et al. 2024.
Vastgaussian: Vast 3d gaussians for large scene reconstruction. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 5166–5175.
[73] Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Christian Theobalt. 2020. Neural sparse voxel fields. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 15651–15663.
[74] Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and Deva Ramanan. 2024. Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by persistent dynamic
view synthesis. In 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV).
IEEE, 800–809.

ARC: Adaptive Atomic Reduction

[75] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul HJ Kelly, and Andrew J Davison. 2024. Gaussian splatting slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 18039–18048.
[76] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T
Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021. Nerf: Representing
scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM
65, 1 (2021), 99–106.
[77] Muhammad Husnain Mubarik, Ramakrishna Kanungo, Tobias Zirr,
and Rakesh Kumar. 2023. Hardware Acceleration of Neural Graphics. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture. 1–12.
[78] Anurag Mukkara, Nathan Beckmann, and Daniel Sanchez. 2019. PHI:
Architectural support for synchronization-and bandwidth-efficient
commutative scatter updates. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture. 1009–1022.
[79] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller.
2022. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash
encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 41, 4 (2022), 1–15.
[80] Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas Müller, and Sanja Fidler. 2022.
Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Lighting From Images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 8280–8290.
[81] Merlin Nimier-David, Delio Vicini, Tizian Zeltner, and Wenzel Jakob.
2019. Mitsuba 2: A retargetable forward and inverse renderer. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38, 6 (2019), 1–17.
[82] Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc
Moreno-Noguer. 2021. D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic
scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 10318–10327.
[83] Nikhila Ravi, Jeremy Reizenstein, David Novotny, Taylor Gordon,
Wan-Yen Lo, Justin Johnson, and Georgia Gkioxari. 2020. Accelerating
3d deep learning with pytorch3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08501
(2020).
[84] Brandon Reagen, Udit Gupta, Lillian Pentecost, Paul Whatmough,
Sae Kyu Lee, Niamh Mulholland, David Brooks, and Gu-Yeon Wei.
2018. Ares: A framework for quantifying the resilience of deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Design Automation
Conference. 1–6.
[85] Xiaowei Ren and Mieszko Lis. 2017. Efficient sequential consistency
in gpus via relativistic cache coherence. In 2017 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE,
625–636.
[86] Xiaowei Ren, Daniel Lustig, Evgeny Bolotin, Aamer Jaleel, Oreste
Villa, and David Nellans. 2020. Hmg: Extending cache coherence
protocols across modern hierarchical multi-gpu systems. In 2020 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA). IEEE, 582–595.
[87] Darius Rückert, Linus Franke, and Marc Stamminger. 2022. Adop: Approximate differentiable one-pixel point rendering. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (ToG) 41, 4 (2022), 1–14.
[88] Hermann Schweizer, Maciej Besta, and Torsten Hoefler. 2015. Evaluating the cost of atomic operations on modern architectures. In
2015 International Conference on Parallel Architecture and Compilation
(PACT). IEEE, 445–456.
[89] Steven L Scott. 1996. Synchronization and communication in the T3E
multiprocessor. In Proceedings of the seventh international conference
on Architectural support for programming languages and operating
systems. 26–36.
[90] Yahao Shi, Yanmin Wu, Chenming Wu, Xing Liu, Chen Zhao,
Haocheng Feng, Jingtuo Liu, Liangjun Zhang, Jian Zhang, Bin Zhou,
et al. 2023. Gir: 3d gaussian inverse rendering for relightable scene
factorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05133 (2023).
[91] Matthew D Sinclair, Johnathan Alsop, and Sarita V Adve. 2015. Efficient GPU synchronization without scopes: Saying no to complex

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
consistency models. In Proceedings of the 48th International Symposium on Microarchitecture. 647–659.
[92] Inderpreet Singh, Arrvindh Shriraman, Wilson WL Fung, Mike
O’Connor, and Tor M Aamodt. 2013. Cache coherence for GPU
architectures. In 2013 IEEE 19th International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE, 578–590.
[93] Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. 2022. Improved direct
voxel grid optimization for radiance fields reconstruction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.05085 (2022).
[94] Abdulaziz Tabbakh, Xuehai Qian, and Murali Annavaram. 2018. Gtsc: Timestamp based coherence for gpus. In 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE,
403–415.
[95] Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Terrance Wang, Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi,
Abhik Ahuja, et al. 2023. Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural radiance field development. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference
Proceedings. 1–12.
[96] Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng.
2023. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian splatting for efficient 3d
content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16653 (2023).
[97] Ayush Tewari, Ohad Fried, Justus Thies, Vincent Sitzmann, Stephen
Lombardi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Tomas Simon,
Jason Saragih, Matthias Nießner, et al. 2020. State of the art on neural
rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 39. Wiley Online Library,
701–727.
[98] Xi Wang, Brody Williams, John D Leidel, Alan Ehret, Michel Kinsy,
and Yong Chen. 2020. Remote atomic extension (rae) for scalable high
performance computing. In 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC). IEEE, 1–6.
[99] Craig M Wittenbrink, Emmett Kilgariff, and Arjun Prabhu. 2011.
Fermi GF100 GPU architecture. IEEE Micro 31, 2 (2011), 50–59.
[100] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang,
Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. 2024. 4d gaussian
splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
20310–20320.
[101] Rundi Wu, Ben Mildenhall, Philipp Henzler, Keunhong Park, Ruiqi
Gao, Daniel Watson, Pratul P Srinivasan, Dor Verbin, Jonathan T
Barron, Ben Poole, et al. 2024. Reconfusion: 3d reconstruction with
diffusion priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 21551–21561.
[102] Songm Xinkai, Yuanbo Wen, Xing Hu, Tianbo Liu, Haoxuan Zhou,
Husheng Han, Tian Zhi, Zidong Du, Lim Wei, Rui Zhang, Chen Zhang,
Lin Gao, Qi Guo, and Tianshi Chen. 2023. ARTist: A Fully Fused Accelerator for Real-Time Learning of Neural Scene Representation. In
Proceedings of the 56th International Symposium on Microarchitecture.
1–13.
[103] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong Wang,
and Xuelong Li. 2024. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian
splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 19595–19604.
[104] Yunzhi Yan, Haotong Lin, Chenxu Zhou, Weijie Wang, Haiyang
Sun, Kun Zhan, Xianpeng Lang, Xiaowei Zhou, and Sida Peng. 2024.
Street gaussians for modeling dynamic urban scenes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.01339 (2024).
[105] Chen Yang, Sikuang Li, Jiemin Fang, Ruofan Liang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Shen, and Qi Tian. 2024. GaussianObject: Just
Taking Four Images to Get A High-Quality 3D Object with Gaussian
Splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10259 (2024).
[106] Ziyi Yang, Xinyu Gao, Wen Zhou, Shaohui Jiao, Yuqing Zhang, and
Xiaogang Jin. 2024. Deformable 3d gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 20331–20341.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[107] Zeyu Yang, Hongye Yang, Zijie Pan, and Li Zhang. 2024. Real-time
Photorealistic Dynamic Scene Representation and Rendering with
4D Gaussian Splatting. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
[108] Zeyu Yang, Hongye Yang, Zijie Pan, Xiatian Zhu, and Li Zhang. 2023.
Real-time photorealistic dynamic scene representation and rendering
with 4d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10642 (2023).
[109] Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang,
Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. 2023. GaussianDreamer:
Fast Generation from Text to 3D Gaussian Splatting with Point Cloud
Priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08529 (2023).
[110] Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo
Kanazawa. 2021. Plenoctrees for real-time rendering of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision. 5752–5761.
[111] Lingqi Zhang, Mohamed Wahib, Peng Chen, Jintao Meng, Xiao
Wang, Toshio Endo, and Satoshi Matsuoka. 2023. PERKS: a LocalityOptimized Execution Model for Iterative Memory-bound GPU Applications. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Supercomputing. 167–179.

Sankeerth Durvasula et al.

[112] Xiaoyu Zhou, Zhiwei Lin, Xiaojun Shan, Yongtao Wang, Deqing Sun,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 2024. Drivinggaussian: Composite gaussian
splatting for surrounding dynamic autonomous driving scenes. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 21634–21643.
[113] Feiwen Zhu, Jeff Pool, Michael Andersch, Jeremy Appleyard, and
Fung Xie. 2018. Sparse persistent RNNs: Squeezing large recurrent
networks on-chip. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.10223 (2018).
[114] Wojciech Zielonka, Timur Bagautdinov, Shunsuke Saito, Michael Zollhöfer, Justus Thies, and Javier Romero. 2023. Drivable 3D Gaussian
Avatars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08581 (2023).
[115] Zi-Xin Zou, Zhipeng Yu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yangguang Li, Ding Liang,
Yan-Pei Cao, and Song-Hai Zhang. 2024. Triplane meets gaussian
splatting: Fast and generalizable single-view 3d reconstruction with
transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 10324–10335.

