Rethinking Java Performance Analysis
Stephen M. Blackburn

Zixian Cai

Rui Chen

steveblackburn@google.com
Google
Sydney, Australia
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia

zixian.cai@anu.edu.au
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia

chenrui.crc@bytedance.com
Independent
Beijing, China

Xi Yang

John Zhang

John Zigman

xi@iop.systems
IOP Systems
Sydney, Australia

john.z@canva.com
Canva
Sydney, Australia

john.zigman@sydney.edu.au
The University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Representative workloads and principled methodologies are
the foundation of performance analysis, which in turn provides the empirical grounding for much of the innovation in
systems research. However, benchmarks are hard to maintain, methodologies are hard to develop, and our field moves
fast. The tension between our fast-moving fields and their
need to maintain their methodological foundations is a serious challenge. This paper explores that challenge through the
lens of Java performance analysis. Lessons we draw extend
to other languages and other fields of computer science.
In this paper we: i) introduce a complete overhaul of
the DaCapo benchmark suite [7], characterizing 22 new
and/or refreshed workloads across 47 dimensions, using principal components analysis to demonstrate their diversity,
ii) demonstrate new methodologies and how they are integrated into an easy to use framework, iii) use this framework
to conduct an analysis of the state of the art in production
Java performance, and iv) motivate the need to invest in
renewed methodologies and workloads, using as an example a review of contemporary production garbage collector
performance.
We highlight the danger of allowing methodologies to lag
innovation and respond with a suite and new methodologies that nudge forward some of our field’s methodological
foundations. We offer guidance on maintaining the empirical
rigor we need to encourage profitable research directions
and quickly identify unprofitable ones.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software performance.
Keywords: Performance Analysis; Java; Garbage Collection

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 International License.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707217

ACM Reference Format:
Stephen M. Blackburn, Zixian Cai, Rui Chen, Xi Yang, John Zhang,
and John Zigman. 2025. Rethinking Java Performance Analysis. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 72 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3669940.3707217

1

Introduction

Building and maintaining benchmarks is a Sisyphean task,
yet our field depends critically on them. Methodological innovation seems to be uncommon, yet our field is fast moving,
so demands it. These two contradictions pose an enduring
risk that we misdirect our field, abandoning promising ideas
while pursuing ideas that we should have abandoned [6].
DaCapo is a broadly-focussed benchmark suite for Java
heavily used in diverse domains within academia and industry [8, 20, 27, 45]. We motivate this work with a case study
using DaCapo Chopin to explore overheads of contemporary
production garbage collectors. We find that garbage collectors are consuming 15 % of CPU cycles even in the most
favorable situations and that newer garbage collectors incur
even higher overheads — as high as 17× in small heaps and
63 % in generous ones. What is interesting and relevant to
our paper is not these overheads, but that they’ve largely
gone unnoticed. Given the scale at which Java is deployed,
the likely impact is substantial. We suggest that this lack of
awareness is an example of collective methodological inattention.
One contribution of this paper is that we highlight the importance of the systems community continuously improving
and evolving our methodologies. The heart of contribution,
though, is DaCapo Chopin, a major release of the DaCapo
benchmark suite for Java [7] that took fourteen years to
develop, with eight entirely new workloads, all other workloads fully refreshed, a new methodology for measuring and
reporting latency, nine latency-sensitive workloads, novel integrated workload characterization, and applications targeting the phone and the server, with minimum heap sizes from

