QRCC: Evaluating Large Quantum Circuits on Small
Quantum Computers through Integrated Qubit Reuse
and Circuit Cutting
Aditya Pawar

Yingheng Li

Zewei Mo

adp110@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

yil392@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

zewei.mo@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

Yanan Guo

Xulong Tang

Youtao Zhang

yag45@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

tax6@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

zhangyt@cs.pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

Jun Yang
juy9@pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
USA

Abstract
Quantum computing has recently emerged as a promising
computing paradigm for many application domains. However, the size of quantum circuits that can be run with high
fidelity is constrained by the limited quantity and quality of
physical qubits. Recently proposed schemes, such as wire
cutting and qubit reuse, mitigate the problem but produce
sub-optimal results as they address the problem individually. In addition, gate cutting, an alternative circuit-cutting
strategy that is suitable for circuits computing expectation
values, has not been fully explored in the field.
In this paper, we propose QRCC, an integrated approach
that exploits qubit reuse and circuit-cutting (including wire
cutting and gate cutting) to run large circuits on small quantum computers. Circuit-cutting techniques introduce nonnegligible post-processing overhead, which increases exponentially with the number of cuts. QRCC exploits qubit reuse
to find better cutting solutions to minimize the cut numbers
and thus the post-processing overhead. Our evaluation results show that on average we reduce the number of cuts by
29% and additional reduction when considering gate cuts.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674179

ACM Reference Format:
Aditya Pawar, Yingheng Li, Zewei Mo, Yanan Guo, Xulong Tang,
Youtao Zhang, and Jun Yang. 2024. QRCC: Evaluating Large Quantum Circuits on Small Quantum Computers through Integrated
Qubit Reuse and Circuit Cutting. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024,
La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674179

1

Introduction

Quantum computing has recently emerged as a promising
computing paradigm for many application domains, such as
machine learning [7, 28, 47], chemistry simulation [3, 25, 40],
and optimization [31, 34]. The problems from these domains
scale quickly such that they require increasingly larger faulttolerant quantum computers. Unfortunately, we are currently
in the NISQ (noisy intermediate-scale quantum) era [15]
where quantum devices suffer from various noises, e.g., short
coherence time and crosstalk among qubits, and small device
sizes, e.g., current quantum devices only have up to 100s of
qubits.
It has become one of the major challenges to run large
quantum circuits in the NISQ era. Large quantum computers,
e.g., IBM 433 osprey, often have limited availability to the
general public. In addition, not all qubits of large quantum
computers exhibit high computational fidelity — some noisy
qubits have to be frozen, i.e., not used, for some computation
tasks [4]. Error mitigation schemes [12, 14, 39, 51] help to
improve computation fidelity [15, 45, 47] but have limited
effectiveness due to the limited availability of physical qubits
on devices. As an alternative to physical quantum execution,
software simulation offers a noise-free execution environment for quantum circuits. However, the simulation cost

