Fusion: An Analytics Object Store Optimized for Query
Pushdown
Jianan Lu∗

Ashwini Raina∗

Asaf Cidon

Michael J. Freedman

Princeton University
Princeton, United States
jiananl@princeton.edu

Princeton University
Princeton, United States
araina@princeton.edu

Columbia University
New York, United States
asaf.cidon@columbia.edu

Princeton University
Princeton, United States
mfreed@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract

Data Warehouses

The prevalence of disaggregated storage in public clouds has
led to increased latency in modern OLAP cloud databases,
particularly when handling ad-hoc and highly-selective queries
on large objects. To address this, cloud databases have adopted
computation pushdown, executing query predicates closer
to the storage layer. However, existing pushdown solutions
are inefficient in erasure-coded storage. Cloud storage employs erasure coding that partitions analytics file objects into
fixed-sized blocks and distributes them across storage nodes.
Consequently, when a specific part of the object is queried,
the storage system must reassemble the object across nodes,
incurring significant network latency.
In this work, we present Fusion, an object store for analytics that is optimized for query pushdown on erasurecoded data. It co-designs its erasure coding and file placement
topologies, taking into account popular analytics file formats
(e.g., Parquet). Fusion employs a novel stripe construction
algorithm that prevents fragmentation of computable units
within an object, and minimizes storage overhead during
erasure coding. Compared to existing erasure-coded stores,
Fusion improves median and tail latency by 64% and 81%, respectively, on TPC-H, and up to 40% and 48% respectively, on
real-world SQL queries. Fusion achieves this while incurring
a modest 1.2% storage overhead compared to the optimal.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Cloud based
storage.
Keywords: data analytics; erasure codes; distributed storage
ACM Reference Format:
Jianan Lu, Ashwini Raina, Asaf Cidon, and Michael J. Freedman.
2025. Fusion: An Analytics Object Store Optimized for Query Pushdown. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707234
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707234

Query Optimizer

End Users

SQL
Queries

Results

Sub Queries

Partial
Results

Computation Pushdown Layer

Cloud
Storage

E.g., S3 Select, Azure Storage query acceleration, AWS AQUA

Network

Figure 1. Existing architecture of computation pushdown
within the domain of big data analytics in the cloud.

1

Introduction

Major clouds operators like AWS, Azure, and GCP have
embraced disaggregated storage architectures. Under such
paradigms, raw data is uploaded to a highly-available object
store such as AWS S3 or Azure Storage. When needed, data
is fetched into a compute cluster to run compute-intensive
jobs. While storage disaggregation helps improve resource
utilization and elasticity in public clouds, it can hurt the performance of ad-hoc, interactive analytics queries on large
objects. Prior work [47, 93, 99] shows that object stores are
dominated by large objects and large object reads are prevalent. In one storage production trace from Microsoft [47],
over 60% of objects have size greater than 1GB. Meanwhile,
real-world workloads are highly selective. BigQuery [59, 85]
reports that about 50% of queries return less than 1% of the
data. Transferring a large object over the network while
eventually using only a small portion of its data not only
wastes valuable network bandwidth but also significantly
degrades query performance.
To improve the performance of ad-hoc, interactive queries,
analytics systems deploy a classic technique called computation pushdown, which ships compute closer to storage to
avoid unnecessary data movement. Figure 1 depicts the highlevel architecture of computation pushdown for big data
analytics in the cloud. Users can submit simple SQL-like
queries to be executed closer to the object stores. Upstream
database query engines can also push down parts of query
plans to the object stores, such as highly-selective predicates
and aggregates, thereby reducing the data volume sent to the

