Practical Federated Recommendation Model Learning
Using ORAM with Controlled Privacy
Jinyu Liu

Wenjie Xiong

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
jzl6359@psu.edu

Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, USA
wenjiex@vt.edu

G. Edward Suh

Kiwan Maeng

NVIDIA
Westford, MA, USA
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
esuh@nvidia.com

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
kvm6242@psu.edu

Abstract

ACM Reference Format:
Jinyu Liu, Wenjie Xiong, G. Edward Suh, and Kiwan Maeng. 2025.
Practical Federated Recommendation Model Learning Using ORAM
with Controlled Privacy. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716014

Training high-quality recommendation models requires collecting sensitive user data. The popular privacy-enhancing
training method, federated learning (FL), cannot be used
practically due to these models’ large embedding tables. This
paper introduces FEDORA, a system for training recommendation models with FL. FEDORA allows each user to only
download, train, and upload a small subset of the large tables based on their private data, while hiding the access
pattern using oblivious memory (ORAM). FEDORA reduces
the ORAM’s prohibitive latency and memory overheads by
(1) introducing 𝜖-FDP, a formal way to balance the ORAM’s
privacy with performance, and (2) placing the large ORAM in
a power- and cost-efficient SSD with SSD-friendly optimizations. Additionally, FEDORA is carefully designed to support
(3) modern operation modes of FL. FEDORA achieves high
model accuracy by using private features during training
while achieving, on average, 5× latency and 158× SSD lifetime improvement over the baseline.

1

Introduction

Recommendation models are crucial in modern internet services, recommending music [76], videos [17, 105], news [123],
and products [134] to people. These models are commonly
trained by the service provider with sensitive user features
(e.g., demographic information or behavioral histories) [88,
135, 136], posing privacy concerns. Users are becoming reluctant to share these sensitive data, and governments and
companies are strengthening regulations to limit the collection of such data [28, 112]. Past incidents have reported that
the inability to collect these data degrades the quality of recommendation services [62]. Our evaluation (Section 6) also
shows that sensitive data is crucial for high model quality.
Federated learning (FL) [77] is a popular technique to train
models without collecting raw user data. Unfortunately, recommendation models cannot be trained with FL due to their
large embedding tables, which convert discrete sparse user
features into latent vectors. These tables are usually too
large [58, 85, 130, 134] to train with FL because participants
of FL cannot practically download and train them on their
local devices (e.g., smartphones) in their entirety.
In this paper, we propose FEDORA, a system that trains
recommendation models with FL by allowing users to download and train only subsets of embedding tables relevant to
their data. As naively doing so leaks private features via the
entries downloaded [37, 87], FEDORA adopts ORAM [31],
a primitive that obfuscates memory access patterns, to mitigate this leakage. The main challenges lie in overcoming

CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Usability in
security and privacy; • Information systems → Recommender systems.
Keywords: Federated Learning; Differential Privacy; Privacy
Preserving Machine Learning; Trusted Execution Environment; Oblivious Memory; Solid State Drives
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/2025/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716014

913

