Bounding Speculative Execution of Atomic Regions to
a Single Retry
Eduardo José Gómez-Hernández

Juan M. Cebrian

eduardojose.gomez@um.es
Computer Engineering Department
University of Murcia
Murcia, Spain

jcebrian@um.es
Computer Engineering Department
University of Murcia
Murcia, Spain

Stefanos Kaxiras

Alberto Ros

stefanos.kaxiras@it.uu.se
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden

aros@ditec.um.es
Computer Engineering Department
University of Murcia
Murcia, Spain

Abstract

Using gem5 running data-structure benchmarks and the
STAMP benchmark suite, we show that the average number
of ARs that succeed on the first retry grows from 35.4% in
our baseline to 64.4% with cleAR, reducing the percentage
of fallback (coarse-grain mutual exclusion) execution from
37.2% to 15.4%. These improvements reduce average execution time by 35.0% over a baseline configuration and by 23.3%
over more elaborated approaches like PowerTM.

Mutual exclusion has long served as a fundamental construct
in parallel programs. Despite a long history of optimizing
the lower-level lock and unlock operations used to enforce
mutual exclusion, such operations largely dictate performance in parallel programs. Speculative Lock Elision, and
more generally Hardware Transactional Memory, allow executing atomic regions (ARs) concurrently and speculatively,
and ensure correctness by using conflict detection. However,
practical implementations of these ideas are best-effort and,
in case of conflicts, the execution of ARs is retried a predetermined number of times before falling back to mutual
exclusion.
This work explores the opportunities of using cacheline
locking to bound the number of retries of speculative solutions. Our key insight is that ARs that access exactly the
same set of addresses when re-executing can learn that set
in the first execution and execute non-speculatively in the
next one by performing an ordered cacheline locking. This
way the speculative execution is bounded to a single retry.
We first establish the conditions for ARs to be able to
re-execute under a cacheline-locked mode. Based on these
conditions, we propose cleAR, cacheline-locked executed
AR, a novel technique that on the first abort, forces the reexecution to use cacheline locking. The detection and conversion to cacheline-locking mode is transparent to software.

ACM Reference Format:
Eduardo José Gómez-Hernández, Juan M. Cebrian, Stefanos Kaxiras,
and Alberto Ros. 2024. Bounding Speculative Execution of Atomic
Regions to a Single Retry . In 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3622781.3674176

1

Introduction

Shared-memory parallel thread coordination is dominated
by two models: First, historically, is the mutual-exclusion
(ME) model epitomized by critical sections (CS) that are
protected by locks. The second is the transactional memory
(TM) model epitomized by transactions (TX) that rely on
conflict detection and re-tries.
There is an inherent tension in the mutual exclusion model
regarding the granularity of the CS protected by locks. Using
coarser locking is easier (compared to, for example, using
multiple nested locks), and it means fewer locks and (expensive) lock operations overall, but perhaps with higher
contention. The transactional model resolves this tension by
relieving the programmer from specifying the locking granularity, instead relying on detecting conflicts in the dynamic
set of addresses that are accessed in a transaction. Yet, the
speculative nature of a transaction and the need to bound its
re-tries, inevitably leads us back to treating it as a CS with
coarse-grain locking as the fallback path.
In this work, we take a unified view of critical sections
and transactions and discuss them simply as atomic regions:

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674176

17

