Composing Distributed Computations Through Task
and Kernel Fusion
Rohan Yadav

Shiv Sundram

Wonchan Lee

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
rohany@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
shiv1@stanford.edu

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
wonchanl@nvidia.com

Michael Garland

Michael Bauer

Alex Aiken

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
mgarland@nvidia.com

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
mbauer@nvidia.com

Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
aiken@cs.stanford.edu

Fredrik Kjolstad
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
kjolstad@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce Diffuse, a system that dynamically performs
task and kernel fusion in distributed, task-based runtime
systems. The key component of Diffuse is an intermediate
representation of distributed computation that enables the
necessary analyses for the fusion of distributed tasks to be
performed in a scalable manner. We pair task fusion with a
JIT compiler to fuse together the kernels within fused tasks.
We show empirically that Diffuse’s intermediate representation is general enough to be a target for two real-world,
task-based libraries (cuPyNumeric and Legate Sparse), letting Diffuse find optimization opportunities across function
and library boundaries. Diffuse accelerates unmodified applications developed by composing task-based libraries by
1.86x on average (geo-mean), and by between 0.93x–10.7x on
up to 128 GPUs. Diffuse also finds optimization opportunities
missed by the original application developers, enabling highlevel Python programs to match or exceed the performance
of an explicitly parallel MPI library.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Distributed
programming languages.
Keywords: Distributed Programming; Composable Software
ACM Reference Format:
Rohan Yadav, Shiv Sundram, Wonchan Lee, Michael Garland, Michael
Bauer, Alex Aiken, and Fredrik Kjolstad. 2025. Composing Distributed Computations Through Task and Kernel Fusion. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707216

Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.
3707216

1

Introduction

A modern trend in distributed programming is to develop
drop-in implementations of popular sequential libraries like
NumPy or SciPy that automatically scale to distributed machines while maintaining the semantics of the original library [12, 13, 30, 60]. To achieve distribution, these drop-in
replacement libraries are implemented by translation to a
distributed task-based runtime system [7, 11, 15, 26, 41]. Libraries map computations to a stream of tasks issued to the
runtime, and map data on to runtime-managed distributed
collections. Tasks are user-defined functions, whose bodies
we call kernels, that operate on subsets of the distributed
collections. The runtime is responsible for extracting parallelism from the input sequence of tasks and for computing
the synchronization and communication required between
tasks. This architecture enables distributed libraries to be
built independently and then composed freely, as the runtime system is responsible for scheduling parallel work and
maintaining coherence of distributed data.
However, the same abstractions that yield important composition properties internally and externally to these distributed libraries can result in degraded end-to-end performance. The task decomposition of library operations results
in tasks that may be optimized individually but can have poor
data locality and allocate much more temporary data than
a different program organization that breaks down the abstraction boundaries by fusing tasks together both within the
operations of a particular library and across library boundaries. As the task-based runtime system is issued a stream
of tasks after library abstraction boundaries have been traversed, the runtime has the opportunity to fuse the tasks

