arXiv:2507.10150v1 [cs.DC] 14 Jul 2025

Past-Future Scheduler for LLM Serving under SLA
Guarantees
Ruihao Gong∗

Shihao Bai∗

Siyu Wu∗

Beihang University
Beijing, China
gongruihao@buaa.edu.cn

SenseTime
Shanghai, China
baishihao@sensetime.com

Beihang University
Beijing, China
wusiyu@buaa.edu.cn

Yunqian Fan

Zaijun Wang

Xiuhong Li

SenseTime
Shanghai, China
fanyunqian@sensetime.com

SenseTime
Shanghai, China
wangzaijun@sensetime.com

Peking University
Beijing, China
lixiuhong@pku.edu.cn

Hailong Yang†

Xianglong Liu†

Beihang University
Beijing, China
hailong.yang@buaa.edu.cn

Beihang University
Beijing, China
xlliu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The exploration and application of Large Language Models
(LLMs) is thriving. To reduce deployment costs, continuous
batching has become an essential feature in current service
frameworks. The effectiveness of continuous batching relies on an accurate estimate of the memory requirements
of requests. However, due to the diversity in request output
lengths, existing frameworks tend to adopt aggressive or
conservative schedulers, which often result in significant
overestimation or underestimation of memory consumption.
Consequently, they suffer from harmful request evictions
or prolonged queuing times, failing to achieve satisfactory
throughput under strict Service Level Agreement (SLA) guarantees (a.k.a. goodput), across various LLM application scenarios with differing input-output length distributions. To
address this issue, we propose a novel Past-Future scheduler that precisely estimates the peak memory resources
required by the running batch via considering the historical distribution of request output lengths and calculating
memory occupancy at each future time point. It adapts to applications with all types of input-output length distributions,
balancing the trade-off between request queuing and harmful
evictions, thereby consistently achieving better goodput. Furthermore, to validate the effectiveness of the proposed scheduler, we developed a high-performance LLM serving framework, LightLLM, that implements the Past-Future scheduler.
Compared to existing aggressive or conservative schedulers,
LightLLM demonstrates superior goodput, achieving up to
2-3× higher goodput than other schedulers under heavy
loads. LightLLM is open source to boost the research in such
direction (https://github.com/ModelTC/lightllm).

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Machine
learning; Parallel computing methodologies.
Keywords: LLM Inference, Scheduling Optimization

1

Introduction

The burgeoning field of Large Language Models (LLMs)
marks a watershed in technology, vastly enhancing potential applications across diverse domains such as chatbots[10,
21], summarization [18, 24, 26], code generation [9], and
advanced reasoning [35, 36]. Models such as GPT-4 [22],
Claude [1], and Llama [32] exemplify this trend, harnessing
hundreds of billions of parameters for exceptional performance. However, the above breakthroughs come with high
deployment expenses, especially under Service Level Agreement (SLA) guarantees. SLA guarantees, which constrain the
first response time of requests and the maximum response
interval between outputs, are crucial to user experience. For
real-world LLM services, throughput under SLA guarantees, also known as goodput, is the well-adopted metric that
accurately reflects the system’s throughput capacity. Take
ChatGPT for example, with 100 million weekly active users,
it strives to maintain stable and scalable services, even with
a robust infrastructure of 10,000 GPUs. In such a context,
optimizing system goodput with limited hardware resources
is not only advantageous but also essential, which helps to
reduce cost and expand the reach of LLMs.
To reduce costs and enhance performance, various innovative approaches have been developed, each targeting
different aspects of the system. The primary focus of these
efforts is to improve the inference backend and optimize
the serving schedule. For improving the inference backend,
existing works such as FlexGEN [27] demonstrate the power
of parallel processing. Using pipeline parallelism, FlexGEN
significantly increases inference throughput on lower-end

