Efficient Lossless Compression of Scientific
Floating-Point Data on CPUs and GPUs
Noushin Azami

Alex Fallin

Martin Burtscher

Texas State University
Department of Computer Science
San Marcos, Texas, USA
noushin.azami@txstate.edu

Texas State University
Department of Computer Science
San Marcos, Texas, USA
waf13@txstate.edu

Texas State University
Department of Computer Science
San Marcos, Texas, USA
burtscher@txstate.edu

Abstract

1

The amount of scientific data being produced, transferred,
and processed increases rapidly. Whereas GPUs have made
faster processing possible, storage limitations and slow data
transfers remain key bottlenecks. Data compression can help,
but only if it does not create a new bottleneck. This paper
presents four new lossless compression algorithms for singleand double-precision data that compress well and are fast
even though they are fully compatible between CPUs and
GPUs. Averaged over many SDRBench inputs, our implementations outperform most of the 18 compressors from the
literature we compare to in compression ratio, compression
throughput, and decompression throughput. Moreover, they
outperform all of them in either throughput or compression
ratio on the two CPUs and two GPUs we used for evaluation.
For example, on an RTX 4090 GPU, our fastest code compresses and decompresses at over 500 GB/s while delivering
one of the highest compression ratios.

The amount of data being produced, transferred, and stored
by scientific simulations (e.g., climate and cosmology) and
instruments (e.g., particle accelerators and coherent light
sources) is increasing rapidly and already often burdens or
exceeds the available I/O bandwidth and storage capacity.
For example, it is estimated that the Velociprobe beam line at
APS will produce over 150 PB of raw data per year [16]. Data
compression can reduce the needed amount of storage and
its associated cost, but only if the compression ratio is sufficiently high. The data acquisition rate of the LCLS-II [25]
light source will reach up to 250 GB/s [11]. Again, data compression can help, but only if the compression throughput is
high enough for real-time operation. Interconnection speeds
are also getting faster. For example, the most recent version
of NVLink can achieve throughputs of up to 900 GB/s, and
the latest PCIe bus specification supports up to 242 GB/s.
Only few compressors can keep up with these throughputs,
especially since they must operate at 𝑋 times higher speeds,
where 𝑋 is the compression ratio, before the interconnect
becomes the bottleneck.
Data can be compressed losslessly or lossily. Lossless compression yields lower compression ratios but recreates the
original data exactly during decompression. It is indispensable in domains where preserving precision and accuracy is
critical, such as in certain computational-physics, climatemodeling, and fluid-dynamics simulations, where lossy compression could introduce errors that affect the validity of
the scientific findings. Other examples include engineering
applications, where lossy compression might compromise
the integrity of the designs, financial modeling and analysis, where lossy compression could lead to monetary losses,
and medical imaging, where lossy compression might introduce artifacts that compromise diagnostic accuracy. In these
and other domains, lossless compression is unavoidable for
efficient storage, transmission, and processing of data.
Since scientific data is often generated and compressed
on one system and decompressed and analyzed on another,
it is important to support compatible compression and decompression across CPUs and GPUs. Yet, most current compressors only support either CPUs or GPUs. To make things
worse, almost all compressors that compress well only deliver low speeds, and almost all compressors that compress

CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Compression
strategies; • Computing methodologies → Massively
parallel algorithms.
Keywords: Data Compression; Lossless Compression; Floatingpoint Data; CPU and GPU Parallelization
ACM Reference Format:
Noushin Azami, Alex Fallin, and Martin Burtscher. 2025. Efficient
Lossless Compression of Scientific Floating-Point Data on CPUs
and GPUs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3669940.3707280
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707280

Introduction

