Litmus: Fair Pricing for Serverless Computing
Qi Pei

Binghamton University
Binghamton, New York, USA
pqi1@binghamton.edu

Yipeng Wang

Intel Labs
Portland, Oregon, USA
yipeng1.wang@intel.com

arXiv:2408.00731v1 [cs.DC] 1 Aug 2024

Abstract
Serverless computing has emerged as a market-dominant
paradigm in modern cloud computing, benefiting both cloud
providers and tenants. While service providers can optimize
their machine utilization, tenants only need to pay for the
resources they use. To maximize resource utilization, these
serverless systems co-run numerous short-lived functions,
bearing frequent system condition shifts. When the system
gets overcrowded, a tenant’s function may suffer from disturbing slowdowns. Ironically, tenants also incur higher costs
during these slowdowns, as commercial serverless platforms
determine costs proportional to their execution times.
This paper argues that cloud providers should compensate tenants for losses incurred when the server is overprovisioned. However, estimating tenants’ losses is challenging without pre-profiled information about their functions.
Prior studies have indicated that assessing tenant losses
leads to heavy overheads. As a solution, this paper introduces a new pricing model that offers discounts based on
the machine’s state while presuming the tenant’s loss under
that state. To monitor the machine state accurately, Litmus
pricing frequently conducts Litmus tests, an effective and
lightweight solution for measuring system congestion. Our
experiments show that Litmus pricing can accurately gauge
the impact of system congestion and offer nearly ideal prices,
with only a 0.2% price difference on average, in a heavily
congested system.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing.
Keywords: Serverless Computing, Congestion Estimation,
Resource Sharing, Online Pricing
ACM Reference Format:
Qi Pei, Yipeng Wang, and Seunghee Shin. 2024. Litmus: Fair Pricing
for Serverless Computing. In 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674181

Seunghee Shin

Binghamton University
Binghamton, New York, USA
sshin@binghamton.edu

USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3622781.3674181

1

Introduction

Serverless computing is growing fast, satisfying today’s high
demands for better programmability. It allows tenants to
develop their programs as stateless functions in high-level
languages such as Python, Go, and JavaScript without concerns with low-level resource management and task scheduling [14, 15, 32, 33, 36]. This advantage attracts cloud users,
helping them to deploy their programs quickly with minimal
effort. Recent reports note that over 50-70% of cloud users
have adopted serverless computing for their tasks [15].
Serverless computing also benefits tenants financially. Unlike traditional cloud platforms that require tenants to purchase the hardware resources needed to deploy their servers
regardless of actual usage [1], serverless computing claims
a pay-as-you-go pricing model, where tenants only pay for
the resources consumed during the execution of their functions, facilitating significant cost savings. Meanwhile, this
pricing requires service providers to accurately monitor and
estimate each user’s fine-grained resource usage [3–5].
However, today’s high-performance systems maximize
resource efficiency by executing multiple applications simultaneously and allowing resources to be shared [45]. Such a
shared serverless system raises two major challenges. First,
tracking a tenant’s resource usage becomes challenging, as
the system can only monitor a tenant’s use of exclusively dedicated resources while the system is shared. Second, and more
importantly, co-running applications compete to grab more
resources, affecting each other’s progress [23, 25, 35, 38, 45].
This interference not only complicates tracking resource usage but also leads to tenants being charged unfairly due to
delayed execution times [10, 19, 23, 40].
A serverless platform should provide a user with an isolated runtime environment. Otherwise, we argue that the
platform provider should compensate a tenant’s loss as a discount when the isolation is not achievable. Thus, we define
a charged fee as fair when it reflects the tenant’s slowdowns
caused by resource sharing. The following two methods can
be used to offer a fair price in a multi-tenant environment.
First, strict resource partitioning can divide shared resources into multiple partitions, each assigned exclusively
to a user. This means the user only pays for the allocated
resources and is free from others’ interference [27, 30, 31, 35].
However, strict partitioning is known to cancel opportunities

