Fast On-device LLM Inference with NPUs
Daliang Xu

Hao Zhang

Liming Yang

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS,
Peking University, China
xudaliang@pku.edu.cn

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China
hao_zhang@bupt.edu.cn

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS,
Peking University, China
yangliming2018@pku.edu.cn

Ruiqi Liu

Gang Huang

Mengwei Xu∗

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS,
Peking University, China
rich@stu.pku.edu.cn

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS,
Peking University, China
National Key Laboratory of Data
Space Technology and System, China
hg@pku.edu.cn

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China
mwx@bupt.edu.cn

Xuanzhe Liu∗
Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS,
Peking University, China
liuxuanzhe@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
On-device inference for Large Language Models (LLMs),
driven by increasing privacy concerns and advancements of
mobile-sized models, has gained significant interest. However, even mobile-sized LLMs (e.g., Gemma-2B) encounter
unacceptably high inference latency, often bottlenecked by
the prefill stage in tasks like screen UI understanding.
We present llm.npu, the first LLM inference system utilizing on-device Neural Processing Unit (NPU) offloading
to reduce prefill latency. llm.npu enhances NPU offloading efficiency by re-constructing the prompt and model in
three levels: (1) At prompt level, it divides variable-length
prompts into multiple fixed-sized chunks while maintaining
data dependencies; (2) At tensor level, it identifies and extracts significant outliers to run on the CPU/GPU in parallel
with minimal overhead; (3) At block level, it schedules Transformer blocks in an out-of-order manner to the CPU/GPU
and NPU based on their hardware affinity and sensitivity
to accuracy. Compared to competitive baselines, llm.npu
achieves 22.4× faster prefill speed and 30.7× energy savings
∗ Corresponding authors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707239

on average, and up to 32.8× speedup in an end-to-end realworld application. For the first time, llm.npu achieves more
than 1,000 tokens/sec prefilling for a billion-sized model.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile computing; • Computer systems organization → Heterogeneous (hybrid) systems; • Computing methodologies → Natural language processing.
Keywords: Mobile computing, large language model, NPU
ACM Reference Format:
Daliang Xu, Hao Zhang, Liming Yang, Ruiqi Liu, Gang Huang,
Mengwei Xu∗ , and Xuanzhe Liu∗ . 2025. Fast On-device LLM Inference with NPUs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707239

1

Introduction

With rising privacy concerns [5], there is growing interest
in running Large Language Models (LLMs) locally on mobile devices, known as on-device LLMs [99, 100, 102], e.g,
Apple Intelligence [2] and Android AI Core [1]. Meanwhile,
the advancement of mobile-sized language models (1B–10B
parameters), such as Qwen2-1.5B and Phi3-3.7B, has demonstrated their ability to perform comparably to significantly
larger models like GPT-3, despite having a reduced parameter
count [24, 26, 27, 60]. This progress makes the deployment
of on-device language models feasible. Without giving away
private data, on-device LLM inference catalyzes novel mobile applications [90], such as UI task automation [55] (e.g.,
translating users’ language commands into UI operations
such as “forward the unread emails to Alice”) and automated
message reply [20].

