arXiv:2409.03365v3 [cs.DC] 11 Feb 2025

Spindle: Efficient Distributed Training of Multi-Task
Large Models via Wavefront Scheduling
Yujie Wang∗

Shenhan Zhu∗

Fangcheng Fu∗

Peking University
Beijing, China
alfredwang@pku.edu.cn

Peking University
Beijing, China
shenhan.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Peking University
Beijing, China
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn

Xupeng Miao

Jie Zhang

Juan Zhu

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
xupeng@purdue.edu

Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
wanglin.zj@alibaba-inc.com

Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
zhujuan.zj@alibaba-inc.com

Fan Hong

Yong Li

Bin Cui∗†

Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
hongfan.hf@alibaba-inc.com

Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
jiufeng.ly@alibaba-inc.com

Peking University
Beijing, China
bin.cui@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent foundation models are capable of handling multiple tasks and multiple data modalities with the unified base
model structure and several specialized model components.
However, efficient training of such multi-task (MT) multimodal (MM) models poses significant system challenges due
to the sophisticated model architecture and the heterogeneous workloads of different tasks and modalities.
In this paper, we propose Spindle, a brand new training
system tailored for resource-efficient and high-performance
training of MT MM models via wavefront scheduling. The
key idea of Spindle is to decompose the model execution
into waves and address the joint optimization problem sequentially, including both heterogeneity-aware workload
parallelization and dependency-driven execution scheduling.
We build our system and evaluate it on various MT MM models. Experiments demonstrate the superior performance and
efficiency of Spindle, with speedup ratio up to 71% compared
to state-of-the-art training systems.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has
witnessed a paradigm shift with the advent of large-scale
foundation models [3, 11, 17, 58–60, 67, 68]. These models are
equipped with extensive intrinsic knowledge, enabling them
to be increasingly applied to a broad spectrum of downstream applications, including both the language domain
(e.g., ChatGPT [51]) and many other data modalities (e.g., images [10, 13, 18, 21, 56], speech [7, 57, 70], video [6, 66]).
The recent extension further involves composite scenarios [4, 5, 8, 9, 40, 46, 63, 73], where models are capable of
∗ School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence Software
Technologies (MOE), Peking University
† Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao)

processing and interpreting data across several tasks simultaneously. However, training these models is highly resourceintensive, requiring substantial GPU computing power. For
example, Meta has announced to release the world-leading
multi-modal model, LLaMA-3 [1], which has over 400B parameters and is trained on more than 48,000 GPUs.
Existing large model training systems are mainly designed
for a single model with only one input data modality. Despite the extensive research and engineering efforts aimed
at optimizing these systems from multiple perspectives, including distributed communication [50, 62, 71, 72], memory
management [12, 61, 64], and GPU computation [15, 16],
their performance is still limited when it comes to handling
the increasingly complex requirements of multi-task (MT)
multi-modal (MM) models. We identify two unique obstacles
when building training systems for MT MM models.
One is the workload heterogeneity between different modalities or tasks. On the one hand, MM models often handle data
that vary significantly in structure and size, demanding specialized preprocessing and computational approaches. For
example, language models (e.g., GPT-family [3, 11, 58, 59],
LLaMA-family [67, 68]) are usually equipped with dozens of
layers with the same configuration (e.g., hidden size), while
vision models may involve uneven layers to compute in various resolutions [39]. On the other hand, multiple tasks may
leverage distinct data flows and activate individual model
components, leading to inter-task workload heterogeneity.
Existing training systems usually overlook such heterogeneity and apply sub-optimal training methodologies.
Another is the execution dependency among different model
components. Recent MT MM model development usually
adopts a sub-model sharing approach [8, 9, 22, 46, 73], where
partial model layers containing common knowledge are
shared across different modalities and tasks. As shown in

