arXiv:2412.10261v2 [cs.CV] 16 Dec 2024

MVQ: Towards Efficient DNN Compression and
Acceleration with Masked Vector Quantization
Shuaiting Li∗

Chengxuan Wang∗

Juncan Deng

list@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

wangchengxuan@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

dengjuncan@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

Zeyu Wang

Zewen Ye

Zongsheng Wang

wangzeyu2020@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

lucas.zw.ye@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

wangzongsheng@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

Haibin Shen

Kejie Huang†

shen_hb@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

huangkejie@zju.edu.cn
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

Abstract
Vector quantization(VQ) is a hardware-friendly DNN compression method that can reduce the storage cost and weightloading datawidth of hardware accelerators. However, conventional VQ techniques lead to significant accuracy loss because the important weights are not well preserved. To tackle
this problem, a novel approach called MVQ is proposed,
which aims at better approximating important weights with
a limited number of codewords. At the algorithm level, our
approach removes the less important weights through N:M
pruning and then minimizes the vector clustering error between the remaining weights and codewords by the masked
k-means algorithm. Only distances between the unpruned
weights and the codewords are computed, which are then
used to update the codewords. At the architecture level, our
accelerator implements vector quantization on an EWS (Enhanced weight stationary) CNN accelerator and proposes a
sparse systolic array design to maximize the benefits brought
by masked vector quantization.
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707268

Our algorithm is validated on various models for image classification, object detection, and segmentation tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that MVQ not only outperforms
conventional vector quantization methods at comparable
compression ratios but also reduces FLOPs. Under ASIC evaluation, our MVQ accelerator boosts energy efficiency by
2.3× and reduces the size of the systolic array by 55% when
compared with the base EWS accelerator. Compared to the
previous sparse accelerators, MVQ achieves 1.73× higher
energy efficiency.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Systolic arrays; • Computing methodologies → Computer
vision; • Hardware → Hardware-software codesign.
Keywords: neural networks; vector quantization; pruning;
systolic arrays
ACM Reference Format:
Shuaiting Li, Chengxuan Wang, Juncan Deng, Zeyu Wang, Zewen
Ye, Zongsheng Wang, Haibin Shen, and Kejie Huang. 2025. MVQ:
Towards Efficient DNN Compression and Acceleration with Masked
Vector Quantization. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707268

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various applications, such as image classification, object
detection, segmentation, etc. Due to the rapid growth of edge
intelligent applications, there has been a growing interest
in deploying DNNs to edge devices, especially for applications with real-time constraints and privacy issues. With
the rapid growth of model parameters, the on-chip cache of
existing accelerators often cannot store all model parameters

