Treelet Accelerated Ray Tracing on GPUs
Yuan Hsi Chou

Tor M. Aamodt

yuanhsi@ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada

aamodt@ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada

Abstract

1

Despite advances in hardware acceleration, ray tracing use
in real-time rendering is limited and often lowers frame rates,
leading users such as video game players to disable the feature entirely. Prior work has shown that dividing the BVH
tree into smaller subtrees (treelets) and traversing all rays
that visit a treelet before switching treelets can significantly
reduce memory traffic on a specialized accelerator, but there
are many challenges to applying treelets to GPUs. We find
that a naive treelet implementation is ineffective and propose
optimizations to improve performance. Virtualized Treelet
Queues consist of two main components. Ray virtualization
increases the number of concurrent rays in flight to create more cache reuse opportunities by terminating raygen
shaders that have already issued their trace ray instruction,
reclaiming CUDA cores and allowing more raygen shaders to
be executed. To take advantage of the increased concurrent
rays, we propose a dynamic treelet queue architecture that
dynamically switches between traversal modes to increase efficiency. We also find that performing warp repacking boosts
SIMT efficiency of warps in the RT unit which is crucial to
achieving good traversal performance with treelet queues.
Our simulations show virtualized treelet queues achieve on
average 95% speedup compared to a baseline GPU with ray
tracing acceleration across all scenes in LumiBench rendered
with path tracing at one sample per pixel with three max
bounces per ray.

Ray tracing can create photorealistic images, and is traditionally used in offline rendering such as for movie production. However, its high computation cost limits it from being
widely used in real-time applications. While modern GPUs
from companies such as NVIDIA, AMD, and Intel feature
dedicated ray tracing hardware to improve rendering speed,
they can still only achieve limited ray-traced effects within
real-time frame rates of 60 frames per second [27].
In ray tracing applications, rays are traced through a scene
to identify intersections with geometry. Ray tracing is a
memory-intensive workload because of the vast amount of
geometry that must be searched through. While scene geometry is already encoded into an acceleration structure as
a bounding volume hierarchy (BVH) tree to reduce search
complexity, traversing the BVH tree is still costly due to long
memory latencies and high cache misses. These challenges
are exacerbated by the fact that rays are usually incoherent
(or lack locality), traversing through different parts of the
BVH tree, and causing memory divergence [18]. Additionally,
BVH trees are large and do not fit in on-chip caches, leading to frequent off-chip memory accesses and high memory
traffic. Figure 1a shows L1 miss rates of only BVH accesses
issued from the RT unit across all scenes in LumiBench for
path tracing [22] measured in Vulkan-Sim [28], a cycle-level
simulator. The average L1 miss rate is 58% and reaches as
high as 70%, implying caches are ineffective at capturing
BVH node locality and promoting data reuse. Additionally,
we observe that the baseline RT unit also has low SIMT efficiency, as shown in Figure 1b, indicating that there are many
inactive threads in the RT unit during traversal which could
be used to improve performance.
To address this, researchers have proposed various techniques to improve ray tracing performance. Aila et al. [5]
proposed to subdivide the BVH tree into smaller subtrees, or
treelets, that fit in the processor’s cache to reduce memory
traffic. They group up and process rays that will traverse
the same treelet first before switching to a different treelet
and its corresponding rays and reduced memory traffic by
50-75%. While no performance results were shown, Aila et
al.’s study motivates the possibility of a 2× or higher performance improvement. However, Aila et al.’s evaluation only
considered memory traffic and did not appear to factor in the
memory latency of accessing data at different levels of the
memory hierarchy, which is crucial for latency-bound workloads like ray tracing. We attempted to implement treelets

ACM Reference Format:
Yuan Hsi Chou and Tor M. Aamodt. 2025. Treelet Accelerated Ray
Tracing on GPUs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716279
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716279

Introduction

