Earth+: on-board satellite imagery compression
leveraging historical earth observations
Kuntai Du1 , Yihua Cheng1 , Peder Olsen2 , Shadi Noghabi2∗ , Ranveer Chandra2 , Junchen Jiang1
1 The University of Chicago
2 Microsoft Research
mission-specific satellites handle the downlink-capacity limitation by filtering images onboard the satellite [38, 64] to
focus only on mission-specific areas prepaid by the customer.
However, this approach is not sufficient for general-purpose
satellite constellations (e.g., Sentinel-2 [40], Doves [58]), whose
goal is to capture and download satellite imagery over wide
geographical regions to serve more applications.
This paper aims to improve onboard compression for satellite imagery.1 . We are inspired by the observation that the
terrestrial content changes slowly between two consecutive
satellite visits at the same location [61, 69]. Thus, to compress a new image, we can compare it with a recent image
of the same region, called a reference image, to detect the
geographic tiles (defined in §3) within the region that has
changed and then only compress and download the changed
tiles. Our measurement on Planet dataset [58] shows that
without the interference of clouds, only 20% of the tiles in
each image have changed in the previous five days on average, which ideally can save downlink usage by up-to 5×
(§3).
Yet, realizing the reference-based encoding for onboard
imagery compression can be challenging because the reference image should be as fresh and contain as little cloud as
possible (§3). Typically, the last cloud-free image captured
by the same satellite [58] can be over 50 days old on average
(§3). With such a large time gap, the reference image and
the new image may have substantial differences (more than
50% of the tiles will have significant changes as shown in
§3), making reference-based encoding less effective.
We present Earth+, a constellation-wide reference-based
encoding system, where the reference images can be selected
from historical images of any satellites in the constellation.
By broadening the set of potential reference images, Earth+
increases the probability of obtaining fresh and cloud-free
reference images. For example, with images from an entire
constellation [58], cloud-free images can be obtained every
4.21 days on average, instead of every 50 days with one
satellite (§4.1).
To enable image sharing across satellites in a constellation,
Earth+ leverages the existing uplinks (ground-to-satellite) to
upload fresh and cloud-free reference images that have been
downloaded from different satellites as illustrated in Figure 1.

arXiv:2403.11434v1 [cs.NI] 18 Mar 2024

ABSTRACT
With the increasing deployment of earth observation satellite
constellations, the downlink (satellite-to-ground) capacity often limits the freshness, quality, and coverage of the imagery
data available to applications on the ground. To overcome
the downlink limitation, we present Earth+, a new satellite
imagery compression system that, instead of compressing
each image individually, pinpoints and downloads only recent imagery changes with respect to the history reference
images. To minimize the amount of changes, it is critical
to make reference images as fresh as possible. Earth+ enables each satellite to choose fresh reference images from
not only its own history images but also past images of other
satellites from an entire satellite constellation. To share reference images across satellites, Earth+ utilizes the limited
capacity of the existing uplink (ground-to-satellite) by judiciously selecting and compressing reference images while
still allowing accurate change detection. In short, Earth+
is the first to make reference-based compression efficient,
by enabling constellation-wide sharing of fresh reference
images across satellites. Our evaluation shows that Earth+
can reduce the downlink usage by a factor of 3.3 compared
to state-of-the-art on-board image compression techniques
while not sacrificing image quality, or using more on-board
computing or storage resources, or more uplink bandwidth
than currently available.

1

INTRODUCTION

Fresh and high-quality satellite imagery is key to many applications, from digital agriculture [19, 44, 56, 57], environmental monitoring [5, 35, 53, 66, 67], to automatic road detection [21, 47, 68], and many more. As a result, large constellations of Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO) earth observation satellites
have been deployed [37, 58, 64] to capture high-quality imagery for any location multiple times a day [37, 58, 64].
However, most satellite imagery data captured by these
satellites are currently not received on the ground due to the
limited downlink (satellite-to-ground) capacity. According to
a recent estimate, only 2% of the total image data observed
by each satellite can be downloaded to the ground [37]. Some

1 Better imagery compression can also improve filtering-based solutions

∗ This work is done while in Microsoft Research.

like [64].

1

We evaluate Earth+ on real-world satellite specifications
(uplink and storage capacities) of the Doves constellation [15]
from Planet Labs. We test Earth+’s compression efficiency
on two datasets. The first dataset is collected from Sentinel-2
dataset [40], with 3.6 TB data covering 110 thousand km2
from Washington State. We use this dataset to test Earth+
under a wide range of contents (e.g., mountains, forests, and
cities), seasons, and under multiple imagery bands (13 bands
in total). Since Sentinel-2 only contains two satellites, we further test Earth+’s performance using the Planet dataset [58],
from which we obtain images from 40 satellites for one sampled location (due to the download limit) of 64 km2 in the
U.S. for three months. Our evaluation shows that:
• Compared to the state-of-the-art onboard compression
schemes, Earth+ reduces the downlink bandwidth usage
by 1.3-3.3× without hurting the imagery quality on all
bands. This can reduce the reaction delays of ground
applications (e.g., forest-fire alerts) by upto 3×.
• These improvements are achieved without using more
uplink bandwidth than currently available or more compute or storage resources than the baselines.
• With more satellites in a constellation, Earth+ can further
reduce the amount of downlink bandwidth usage.
That said, Earth+’s reference-based encoding is not a good
fit for applications that require lossless satellite imagery (§8).
This work does not raise any ethical issues.

Downlink

o
ot
Ph rea
a

Download
all the area

Earth

(a) Traditional: Satellite
compresses images locally

Upload latest
reference collected
from any satellites in
the constellation

o
ot
Ph rea
a

Download
changed area

Earth

(b) Earth+ shares latest reference captured
by any satellites in the constellation

Figure 1: Contrasting Earth+ with traditional satellite imagery

compression. (a) The traditional approach compresses images
by satellites using their local onboard information. (b) Earth+’s
reference-based encoding uses reference images from any satellites in the constellation and uploads the reference images to
the satellite to pinpoint the changed areas and only downloads
their content.

(§4.2 will discuss the rationale of using uplinks, as opposed
to alternatives like inter-satellite links.) The key challenge
facing Earth+ is that existing uplinks of earth observation
satellites have limited capacity (e.g., 250kbps [39]).
We present two techniques (§4.3) to reduce the uplink
usage of Earth+ without sacrificing the savings on the downlink.
First, Earth+ uploads reference images at a low resolution
while still allowing the satellites to detect the most changed
tiles (§4.3). The rationale is that low-resolution images are
sufficient to decide which tiles have changed, which is easier than quantifying how much each pixel in the tile has
changed.
Second, Earth+ does not need to store those unchanged
tiles when capturing new imagery, which frees up the storage
space. We utilize this freed storage space to cache reference
images locally on-board, which allows Earth+ to further
reduce the uplink usage by only uploading tiles that have
changed relative to the on-board cached reference images.
Besides the two aforementioned techniques, our implementation of Earth+ (§5) also entails techniques to handle
satellite-specific issues, including cloud detection, on-board
computation constraints, handling different bands of satellite
imagery, and bandwidth variations.
To put Earth+’s contribution into perspective, while the
observation of redundancy across satellite imagery may not
be new, prior work on onboard imagery compression has
focused on optimizing the compression within each satellite.
In contrast, Earth+ is the first to make reference-based compression efficient, by enabling constellation-wide sharing of
fresh reference images across satellites.

2

MOTIVATION

We start with the background on satellite imagery and earth
observation satellite constellations.

2.1

Background

Many applications can benefit from frequently updated (e.g.,
daily) and high-resolution satellite imagery. For example,
precision agriculture ideally needs daily access to satellite
imagery with each pixel corresponding to a 5m × 5m area
on Earth [12, 20] to help timely decisions on the distribution
of fertilizers, pesticides, and water. Also, wildfire monitoring
requires the imagery to be updated frequently with sufficient
resolution to promptly detect and respond to fire outbreaks,
mitigating potential damage [64].
To provide fresh, high-resolution satellite imagery, many
LEO satellites (e.g., >100 satellites [58]) are deployed to form
satellite constellations. We characterize two features:
• High-resolution imagery: LEO satellites are close to the
ground (due to their low earth orbits) and can capture
imagery with low ground-sampling distance (GSD for
short, lower GSD means higher resolution).
2

2% of the images captured by satellites are actually downloaded to the ground [37].
Further, the downlink demand is constantly growing, with
higher resolution (e.g., a GSD of 0.5m [22]) and more bands
found to be useful (e.g., vegetarian red edge band and water
vapor band [23]). In contrast, the downlink grows slowly
due to the long deployment cycle of satellites. These trends
suggest that the gap between the demand for downlink bandwidth and its actual capacity will likely persist if not increase.
Optimization objective: We aim to address the downlink
bottleneck of satellite constellations by better satellite image compression. More specifically, we aim to use much less
bandwidth to download the same amount of satellite imagery, measured in the number of photoed locations and
frequencies, without compromising image quality. To measure the quality of the downloaded images, we use Peak
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR for short), which aligns with
satellite imagery compression literature [41, 43, 45, 62].
On-board constraints: While optimizing for the image
quality and reducing the downlink consumption, we stick
to real-world on-board storage, computation, and uplink
constraints. We describe the real-world satellite specification
that we used for our evaluation in §6.

Sun-synchronous
orbit

Earth

Area with
ground
station
connectivity

Figure 2: Illustration of a LEO satellite constellation: the satel-

lites follow a sun-synchronous orbit, and the ground station
downloads imagery data from a satellite when the satellite
passes through it.

• Frequent revisit: With a large number of satellites, any
location on the earth’s surface will be frequently revisited (e.g., daily [58]), while a single satellite can only
revisit one location once every ten days [24].
Figure 2 shows an illustrative example of such a largescale LEO satellite constellation, where multiple satellites
are located in a sun-synchronous orbit2 and these satellites
can potentially stream data to the ground when they are
close enough to one of the ground stations (we only plot one
ground station in the figure for simplicity).
Note that in the following text, we denote the ground
as the ground stations that the constellation can potentially
contact and the computation and networking infrastructures
around these ground stations.

2.2

2.3

Existing solutions

There are several approaches to addressing the downlink
bandwidth bottleneck.
The first is to physically increase the downlink capacity
by upgrading the infrastructure, e.g., building more ground
stations [58] or adding more satellites to parallelize the downloading of multiple satellites [37, 40, 58]. The costs of such
infrastructure changes can be prohibitive, and they can be
slow. For context, it takes tens of millions of dollars to build
and send just one single satellite [9].
An alternative is to filter the imagery onboard the satellite [37, 38, 64]. For the mission-specific constellations that
focus on specific regions, this approach can filter out most
of the imagery. For instance, the Biomass mission targets
forest areas to monitor forest coverage changes [2], while the
IceBridge mission observes polar ice to gauge climate change
impacts [1]. However, they must exclude data useful for other
applications. For example, the Biomass mission omits about
91% of the Earth’s surface [8, 11], such as city areas (which
are useful for smart city applications) and agriculture areas
(useful for digital agriculture).
This work focuses on the third approach: onboard imagery compression. It is complementary to the first two
approaches. Existing solutions include augmenting singleimage codecs [25–27, 46, 52, 59, 60, 73] and developing more
expensive neural-based codecs such as autoencoders [28, 30,
36, 75, 76].

Downlink bottleneck and our objective

Downlink capacity gap: Despite more images being captured by the satellites, only a small fraction of data are downloaded to the ground due to the limited capacity of the downlink (satellite-to-ground).3 Specifically, we refer to downlink
bandwidth as the average download speed from satellites
to the ground during each ground contact. The exact gap
between the downlink capacity and the imagery data varies
with the constellation, and a recent study shows only about
2 A sun-synchronous orbit ensures that each location on the earth is ap-

proximately revisited once per day, at approximately the same time local
time, allowing the constellation to capture images with similar illumination
condition once per day.
3 To put this gap in perspective, we use the data from the Doves constellation
in 2017 [58], where each satellite image covers an area of 400 km2 (assuming
6600×4400 resolution [42] and a GSD of 3.7 meters [42]) so after scanning the
whole earth’s surface, we would accumulate 1.275 million images or 191.25
TB of data (with each image being 150 MB [16]). To estimate how much data
can be downloaded, we make the idealized assumption that the satellite
always has a stable connection of 200 Mbps [39] with a ground station. Now,
each satellite scans the whole Earth’s surface every ten days [24], so under
the idealized assumption, the satellite can only transmit 21.6 TB of data to
the ground, which is less than 12% of the 191.25 TB of data accumulated
during that period of time.

3

However, most techniques focus on compressing single
imagery from a single satellite, so they fall short in leveraging the redundancies between images to achieve higher
compression efficiency.

3

REFERENCE-BASED ENCODING

Next, we introduce reference-based encoding, a seemingly
promising idea that leverages a reference image to pinpoint
and download only regions that have recently changed. As
we will see, directly applying this approach to a satellite does
not work well as images locally available to each satellite
may not be recent enough or contain too much cloud to
realize the benefit of reference-based encoding.
Background on reference-based encoding: Referencebased encoding is commonly used to compress a sequence of
images whose content changes slowly and gradually with respect to time[31, 55, 61, 63, 69, 70], such as video streams. Existing reference-based encoding systems (e.g., video codecs [31,
55, 63, 70]) typically select some of the images as the reference
and encode the remaining images by encoding their difference concerning the reference images. As existing codecs
encode the images at the granularity of tiles (a tile is a block
of pixels, where we use a 64×64 pixel block as a tile by default), and the difference is separately calculated per tile.
Since the satellite imagery captured for the same location
also changes slowly over time (as shown in prior work [61,
69]), there is some recent work to apply reference-based encoding in onboard satellite imagery compression [61, 69].
Given a new image, it compares the image with a reference image of the location from the past and pinpoints the
changed tiles with a pixel difference greater than the threshold compared to the reference. It then encodes those changed
tiles and downloads the tiles in their entirety.4 Our work follows this approach when encoding changed tiles (§5).
Reference images need to be fresh: While referencebased encoding seems to be a good fit for imagery compression, it is only effective if the age of the reference image—the
time gap between the reference image and the currently observed image—is as low as possible. Reference image with
high age leads to more changed areas in the currently observed image, which must be downloaded to the ground.
Figure 3 provides an illustrative example, where the changes
that happened on Day 3 compared to Day 1 are much less
than on Day 30 compared to Day 1. To make it more concrete,
we use three months of cloud-free (explained shortly) images

(a) Captured image (b) Fresh reference (c) Older reference
(Day 30)
(Day 27)
(Day 1)
Figure 3: An example illustrating why reference images need

Percentage of changed tiles

to be fresh. Comparing a captured image from Day 30 with a
fresh reference from Day 27 reveals much fewer changes than
when comparing it with an older reference from Day 1. Image
© 2023 Planet Labs PBC.
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0

10

20
30
40
50
Age of reference image (days)

60

Figure 4: More changes need to be downloaded when the age

of the reference image gets larger.

from the Planet dataset [40] on one randomly sampled location in the U.S. Here, we say a tile has changed if it has an
average pixel differences greater than 0.01 after aligning the
illumination (§5).5 Figure 4 shows a steady increase in the
percentage of changed areas with the age of the reference
image: the percentage of changed tiles will increase by 3× if
increasing the age of the reference image from 10 days to 50
days.
Reference images should be cloud-free: If some tiles in
the reference image are covered by clouds, they are not useful as a reference to detect changes. As a consequence, the
corresponding tiles in the current image can only be deemed
as changed and downloaded to the ground. This greatly compromises the benefit of reference-based encoding.
Why reference-based encoding is challenging? In practice, however, there may not always exist a reference in the
satellite’s history images that is both fresh and covered by
little cloud. For example, existing work [61, 69] stores a fixed

4 Unlike conventional video frame encoding, the changed tiles are down-

5 The pixel differences are computed after we normalize pixel values to

loaded in their original pixel values rather than the pixel differences between
the new image and the reference. This is mainly because the reference images are downsampled due to limited onboard storage, thus encoding the
tile itself and the difference concerning its reference requiring a similar
amount of bits.

[0,1]. The threshold of 0.01 means that those areas deemed “unchanged”
would be above 40, which is very high in satellite imagery compression
literature [32] and provides almost the same results as the uncompressed
image in applications like satellite imagery compression [48].
4

CDF

1.0
0.5
0.00

an overview of Earth+ (§4.2). We then present the design of
Earth+ that makes constellation-wide reference-based encoding practical (§4.3).

Constellation-wide
Satellite-local
5
10
15
Age of reference image (days)

20

4.1 Constellation-wide reference selection
Compared to the prior work, which only refers to local images observed by the same satellite, Earth+ augments the
set of reference images that reference-based encoding can
choose from and thus potentially reduces the age of reference images, leading to fewer changes to be downloaded to
the ground.
To illustrate the benefits and challenges of Earth+, we
contrast two designs.
• Satellite-local reference: Pick the latest cloud-free image
observed by the same satellite as the reference image.
• Constellation-wide reference: Pick the latest cloud-free
image observed by any satellite in the whole constellation as the reference image.
Note that the latter is not practical because it needs a large
amount of bandwidth to share the reference images, a challenge we will tackle soon in §4.3.
Figure 6 gives an illustrative example of this contrast with
a constellation of three satellites (in different colors). The
goal is to compress images taken by these satellites for the
same location. To simplify the discussion, all images in this
example are cloud-free. Each satellite takes a cloud-free image every 30 days, so the satellite-local reference (Figure 6(b))
will be 30 days old. Consequently, in the last three images
(Day 31, 41, and 51), 45%-65% of tiles are deemed as changed
and need to be downloaded.
In contrast, with constellation-wide reference Figure 6(c)),
since the reference image can be from any satellite, the
freshest reference is only ten days old rather than 30 days.
As a result, two of the three last images do not have any
changed tiles and one has only 45% changed tiles, i.e., only
15% are changed tiles on average. In short, the ability to pick
reference images from any satellite in the constellation reduces the age of reference images by 3× (30 days to 10 days)
compared to the satellite-local design, and this reduces the
changed tiles to download by 3.6× (55% area to 15% area).

Figure 5: Measuring the age of reference images under two

strategies: updating the reference using historical images locally captured by the satellite (“Satellite-local”) and updating
the reference using images from any satellites in the constellation (“Constellation-wide”). It shows that the constellation-wide
approach can reduce the average age of the reference image
from 51 days to 4.2 days, a 12× reduction.
reference image on-board, which will get older over time
and make most of the areas being counted as changed and
downloaded to the ground, negating the benefit of referencebased encoding. Moreover, even if a satellite were able to
choose the reference image from all of its historical images,
the most recent reference image with less than 1% cloud coverage would still be tens of days old. For instance, Figure 5
shows the age distribution of the closest reference images
that are covered by less than 1% cloud if the satellite chooses
the reference image by itself (i.e., the “Satellite-local” curve
in the figure). We note that the age of the most recent cloudfree reference image is 51 days on average. The reason for
the high ages of recent cloud-free images is two-fold:
• A single satellite revisits the same location at a low frequency (once every 10-15 days [24]). This is because LEO
satellites can only capture a small area on Earth at a time
(since their size is small [64] and they are close to Earth),
necessitating extended periods to complete a full scan
of the Earth before revisiting the same locations.
• Since, on average, 2/3 of the earth is covered by clouds [10],
so even if the most recent image of the same location is
ten days old, it may likely be (partly) covered by cloud
and are not ideal choice for reference images.6

4

EARTH+: CONSTELLATION-WIDE
REFERENCE-BASED ENCODING

To improve onboard satellite imagery compression, we present
Earth+, a reference-based encoding system that obtains fresh
and cloud-free reference images from images captured by
any satellites in the whole constellation, rather than the
history images of the same satellite. This section introduces
the idea of constellation-wide reference sharing (§4.1) and

4.2

Earth+ workflow

Earth+ is a concrete design of constellation-wide referencebased encoding. It answers two basic questions: (1) which
reference images should be shared between different satellites, and (2) how to share these reference images using the
existing infrastructure.
To answer the first question, Earth+ reuses the images
downloaded to the ground from all satellites and selectively
uploads these images as reference images to the satellites.
Figure 7(b) illustrates this workflow.

6 Compared to picking a complete image as the reference, choosing a dif-

ferent reference for each tile may lower the age of the reference, but in
practice this reduction is marginal because when the cloud is present, it
often covers most of an image and the remaining content, if any, will be
influenced by its shadow, making change detection difficult.

5

Day 1

Day 11

Day 21

Day 31

Day 51

Day 41

Day 1

Day 21

Day 11

Day 31

Day 41

Day 51

time
∆(Day 1, Day 31)
to
Pho a
are

∆(Day 21, Day 31)

∆(Day 11, Day 41)

∆(Day 1, Day 11)

∆(Day 31, Day 41)

Earth
∆(Day 21, Day 51)

65%
55%
45%
change change
change
Still need to download many changed areas

(a) A three-satellite constellation
photographing one area

∆(Day 41, Day 51)

∆(Day 11, Day 21)

35%
change

45%
0%
20%
0%
change
change
change change
Need to download much fewer changed areas

(c) Constellation-wide: Satellites can use recent images from
the whole constellation as reference

(b) Satellite-local: Each satellite uses own
history images as reference.

Figure 6: Contrasting two reference image uploading strategies: (a) using satellite-local images as reference images and (b) uploading

reference images using uplink. By uploading images using uplink, one can reduce the average age of the reference image by 3×
(from 30 days to 10 days) and the downloaded areas by 3.6× (55% to 15%) in this example.
• During previous ground contact, the ground station
uploads latest cloud-free images (that can come from
any satellite in the constellation) as reference images for
the locations that the satellite will fly by before the next
ground contact7 .
• When passing over a location, the satellite captures the
imagery, removes clouds, detects changes using the reference images, and encodes the changes.
• During the next ground contact, the satellite downloads
the encoded changes to the ground.
Compared to the workflow of traditional satellite imagery
processing pipelines, which capture images and download
them to the ground (as depicted in Figure 7(a)), Earth+ uploads the reference images from the ground to the satellite.
We rely on ground stations as an “overlay” point to share
images downloaded from each satellite with other satellites.
The rationale is two-fold:
1. The ground stations can access any historical image observed by the whole constellation, allowing Earth+ to
select reference images constellation-wide.
2. The ground station has sufficient computing resources to
more accurately detect clouds and upload only cloud-free
images to satellites as the reference (§3).
A seemingly promising alternative to enable constellationwide reference is to let satellites share data via inter-satellite
links (ISL). Earth+ does not use ISL because it is currently
not available for earth observation satellites [64]. Further,
the scale of existing earth observation constellations (less
than 200 satellites) is insufficient to guarantee a stable ISL

Cloud
removal

Cloud removal &
detect changes
Downlink

o
ot
Ph rea
a
Earth

Download
cloud-free
area

(a) Traditional: Satellite
compresses images locally

o
ot
Ph rea
a

Upload latest
reference picked
from the whole
constellation

Download
changed area

Earth

(b) Earth+ shares reference captured by
other satellites for better compression

Figure 7: Contrasting between the satellite imagery compres-

sion workflow of prior work [37] and Earth+.

connection between any two satellites, as providing such
a guarantee typically requires thousands of satellites (e.g.,
Starlink [54]).

4.3

Tackling limited uplink bandwidth

However, using the uplink to upload reference images to the
satellites is not without challenges—the uplink has limited
bandwidth (e.g., only 250 Kbps in DOVEs constellation [39]).
Earth+ tackles this challenge with three ideas. Put together,
they allow enough reference images to be sent to the satellites
under the limited uplink bandwidth while allowing Earth+
to realize sizable downlink savings.
Downsampling reference images: First, Earth+ compresses reference images by downsampling (i.e., lowering
resolution). Consequently, Earth+ also detects changed tiles
at a low resolution. For instance, if the original resolution of
the captured image is 4000×4000, and the uploaded reference
image is downsampled to 500×500, then the satellite will also

7 It is feasible to upload reference images for geographical locations that

the satellite will visit in the future, as these locations can be accurately
predicted by, for example, Two Line Element data available in Celestrak [3].
6

Reference image

Amount of tiles

30%
20%
10%

Downloaded tiles (fixed)
Changed tiles that are not detected

0%1

10
100
1000
Reference image compression ratio
Figure 8: An example measurement based on the Planet dataset
showing how many changed tiles that are undetected given
different reference image compression ratios, while fixing the
total number of tiles being downloaded. It highlights that only
1.7% of the tiles failed to be detected as changed when compressing the reference images by 2601×.

Illumination
difference

Observed image

Cloud

Figure 9: Two satellite images captured consecutively do have

similar content on the ground, but the pixel difference can still
be significant due to cloud and illumination differences. Image
© 2023 Planet Labs PBC.

changed areas when uploading a new reference image to the
satellite. The overhead of such caching is marginal (about
9%, detailed estimation in §A compared to the existing storage space used to store all reference images on-board), and
thus fits into the storage space conserved by reference-based
encoding. Also, caching reference images on-board allows
Earth+ to handle occasional uplink disconnection (more details in §5).
Uploading only cloud-free areas: Earth+ requires cloudfree reference images to detect terrestrial changes. However,
accurately identifying cloud-free imagery can be computationally expensive, as it requires sequences of images as the
input and tens of layers of the neural network to accurately
detect light haze and faint clouds [74]. As a result, the satellite
does not have sufficient computation on board to accurately
detect cloud-free imagery.
Earth+ takes an alternative design that identifies cloudfree imagery by letting the ground stations re-detect the
cloud in the imagery downloaded from satellites using a
more compute-intensive but more accurate cloud detector.
This allows Earth+ to accurately detect cloud-free images
without incurring extra computation costs on the satellite.

downsample the captured image to 500×500 before calculating the pixel difference in each tile. (Here, we assume both
images have been preprocessed by cloud removal and illumination alignment, which will be described in §5.) We then
mark the tiles with average pixel difference over a threshold
𝜃 (explained shortly) as changed tiles. Finally, the changed
tiles will be saved and compressed before being sent to the
ground. Please refer to §5 on how Earth+ encodes these tiles.
However, detecting changes via downsampled reference
images will not be as accurate as detecting changes using fullresolution reference images. Fortunately, under appropriate
illumination alignment, if a tile does not change significantly
from the reference, it will still have a low difference at a low
resolution. So only changed tiles might be mis-detected as
unchanged (i.e.,false negatives). This can happen when the
pixel changes in a tile are averaged out when downsampling
the new and reference images.
To minimize the false negatives, Earth+ uses a low threshold 𝜃 to detect more changed tiles without misclassifying
an unchanged tile as changed. To demonstrate this, Figure 8
shows that when detecting changed tiles under different resolutions, we can always choose a threshold 𝜃 such that about
40% of tiles are labeled as changed with almost no unchanged
tiles being misclassified (i.e., they are actually unchanged
tiles when seen at a higher resolution). For instance, when an
image is downsampled by over 2600×, only 1.7% of tiles are
mislabeled. In our experiments, we choose a static threshold
𝜃 based on the data in the first year and evaluate it on the
data in the second year.
Only uploading changed areas: As Earth+ applies referencebased encoding, which does not encode the unchanged areas
in the captured satellite imagery, this saves the on-board storage space used for storing captured imagery by about 80%
(as 80% of the areas do not need to be encoded on average,
as shown in §6) and enables Earth+ to use the following optimization to further reduce the usage of uplink. Concretely,
Earth+ locally caches the reference images onboard the satellite for all locations the satellite will visit and only uploads

5

IMPLEMENTATION

Illumination and cloud: In satellite imagery, the time gap
between two consecutively-captured images can be hours [58]
or days [40]. As a result, two consecutive images in the image
sequence can differ a lot in terms of pixel values due to the
illumination condition and the cloud condition difference
(as shown in Figure 9), making the general-purpose change
detector (like the change detector in videos [34, 49, 63, 70])
no longer suitable for satellite imagery compression.
Note that there are other potential sources (e.g. sensor
noise, image misalignment) that can also trigger large pixel
differences. Earth+ does not explicitly address them, as they
only appear in raw data sensed by the satellite, which is not
accessible in public datasets.
7

On-board change detector: To be robust to different cloud
and illumination conditions, Earth+ employs the following
change detection workflow:
• Cloud removal: detect highly cloudy areas in the satellite
imagery using a decision tree classifier, and remove this
part of the data (by filling the corresponding pixels with
zero pixel value).
• Image dropping: drop those images with cloud coverage
greater than 50%.
• Illumination alignment: align the illumination between
the reference image and the captured image on lesscloudy areas using standard linear regression (since the
illumination condition affects the pixel value linearly [72]).
• The difference detection process is mentioned in §4.3.
• Encoding: encode the changed tiles.
Note that the abovementioned pipeline drops those images that are highly cloudy. Acknowledging that this makes
Earth+ less applicable in cloud-sensitive applications like
weather forecasting, we argue that a wide range of applications (e.g., autonomous road detection, precision agriculture,
etc) treat highly cloudy data as of low value and will typically filter them out as they are focusing on the geographical
content on the ground rather than the cloud. Prior work also
makes similar observations [37, 61].
Encoding changed tiles: Earth+ encodes those changed
tiles by selecting the changed tiles as region-of-interest and
runs region-of-interest encoding on the whole image using
an off-the-shelf JPEG-2000 encoder (Kakadu [13]). While
encoding such images, Earth+ makes sure that the bit spent
on each encoded tile is a constant 𝛾 by configuring the bitper-pixel parameter of the Kakadu encoder as 𝛾 times the
percentage of tiles that are changed.
Choosing parameters for Earth+: Earth+ introduces two
parameters: change detection threshold 𝜃 (§4.3) and bit-perpixel 𝛾 for each downloaded imagery. Earth+ chooses 𝜃 by
profiling last year’s data on one single location, and uses this
parameter on this year’s data for all locations. Earth+ then
varies 𝛾 to trade-off between the downlink usage and the
imagery quality.
Fitting into on-board computation constraint: In the
change detector of Earth+, both illumination alignment and
difference detector can be cheaply done on-board. However,
accurate cloud detection can be compute-intensive, as it typically requires using a series of images as input and tens of
layers of neural network to accurately detect thin clouds [74].
To reduce the computation cost of the on-board cloud detector, the main observation of Earth+ is that it is tolerable if
the cloud detector fails to detect some clouds (as they will be
detected as changed and downloaded to the ground, which
is tolerable as long as the downlink saving of Earth+ is still
sizable), but it is harmful if the cloud detector wrongfully

detect non-cloudy area as cloudy as it will trigger Earth+
to discard these areas, where there may be changes. Using
this observation, Earth+ only detects those easy-to-detect
clouds (e.g., heavy clouds), which can be done by a cheap
decision-tree-based detector (as the temperature of heavy
clouds significantly differs from the nearby ground and can
be easily detected using the InfraRed band) while still ensuring that almost all areas that the cloud detector detects are
cloudy. Further, Earth+ also detects the cloud under a downsampled version of the captured imagery (64×, width and
height) as Earth+ only uses the cloud detection to identify
which 64×64 tiles need to be downloaded.
After these optimization techniques, Earth+ can make
cloud detection faster compared to running JPEG-2000 encoding, while making sure that over 99% of areas detected
are actually cloudy.
Handling different bands: Unlike traditional RGB images,
satellite imagery typically has multiple bands (e.g., nearinfrared band and short-wave infrared band) and the amount
of changes of different bands (B1 – B12) on cloud-free areas
are different. This is because some of the bands aim to monitor the air quality and thus do not change significantly in
cloud-free areas (e.g., B9), while some of the bands change
a lot due to their temperature sensitivity (e.g., vegetation
bands such as B7, B8, and B8a measures the concentration
of chlorophyll, which is sensitive to temperature). To handle such heterogeneity between bands, Earth+ treats each
band separately, which means that Earth+ detects changes
band-by-band and updates the reference images band-byband, allowing Earth+ to mark different areas as changed and
download different amounts of changes for different bands.
Handling bandwidth fluctuation: We introduce how
Earth+ handles the fluctuation of uplink and downlink bandwidth.
We first handle uplink alteration. As Earth+ locally caches
the reference images, when the capacity of the uplink alters,
Earth+ can skip the updating of some reference images (the
skipped images are randomly chosen) and rely on the old
reference images cached on-board for change detection, with
a slight increase on the downlink capacity.
We then handle downlink alteration. Earth+ relies on the
layered codec to handle the alteration of downlink. The characteristic of layered codec is that by encoding the images
to multiple layers, Earth+ can smoothly trade-off between
downlink bandwidth and the quality of downloaded imagery
quality: the ground can download more layers to receive highquality imagery when having sufficient downlink bandwidth
or download fewer layers to the ground when the downlink
bandwidth is limited. The feature of layered codec is widely
supported by existing imagery encoders on the satellite (e.g.,
JPEG-2000 encoders [7, 13]). We note that Earth+ downloads
8

Section
Connectivity
Hardware
Image

Properties
Ground contact duration
Ground contact per day
Uplink bandwidth
Downlink bandwidth
On-board storage
Image resolution
Image channels
Raw image file size
Ground sampling distance

Values
10 minutes [14, 33]
7 times [33]
250 kbps [39]
200 Mbps [39]
360 GB [17]
6600×4400 [42]
RGB + InfraRed [42]
150 MB [16]
3.7 meters [42]

To handle the large volumn of this dataset, we downsample the images in this dataset by 4×, width and height,
where we confirmed on one location that such downsampling does not affect the savings of Earth+.
However, Sentinel-2 dataset [40] only contains two
satellites in its constellation. To further show the potential of Earth+’s constellation-wide change-based encoding, we incorporate another dataset with lower coverage
but with more satellites available.
• Large-constellation dataset: we use Planet dataset [58]
that contains multiple satellites in its constellation to
showcase the potential of Earth+’s constellation-wide
change-based encoding. Due to the quota limit of the
Planet dataset, we only sample images on one randomly
sampled location in the U.S. (the content is illustrated in
Figure 10f), with cloud coverage smaller than 5%. The
dataset we sampled contains 48 satellites in total.
Real-world satellite specifications: We show the satellite
specifications in Table 1.
Modelling uplink and downlink: We evaluate Earth+
using the uplink and downlink specifications from Doves
constellation. Specifically:
• Uplink: we assume that the uplink is of a constant bandwidth (250 kbps [39]) and the connection duration is 10
minutes [14, 33]. Here we assume that the uplink bandwidth is a constant, as the uplink leverages the S-band
to communicate [6], which is of low frequency, and thus
severe weather conditions do not significantly affect its
bandwidth [65].
• Downlink: we assume that the ground contact duration
is 10 minutes [14, 33] and calculate the minimum average bandwidth required to download a fixed amount of
images.
Metrics: Earth+ aims to reduce the downlink demand without hurting the quality of downloaded images. We measure
the required downlink bandwidth by dividing the amount
of data needed to be streamed during one ground contact
by the ground contact time (10 minutes [14, 33]) and measure the image quality by using Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR for short). This aligns with satellite compression literature [41, 43, 45, 62]. Further, prior work shows that a
higher Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio typically leads to higher
application-side performance [32, 48].
Baselines: We consider two state-of-the-art baselines for
on-board satellite imagery compression:
• Kodan [37]: drop low-value cloud data and download
remaining non-cloudy areas.
• SatRoI [61]: running reference-based encoding using a
fixed reference image.
We evaluate Earth+ on the standard JPEG-2000 image encoder, which is already used by existing satellites [4, 18].

Table 1: Characterizing the specifications of Doves constellation

from the year 2017 to the year 2018. Some of the data are not
publically available and we infer them from other sources (we
italicized the data that we inferred, with the corresponding
sources cited next to the inferred data).

the same amount of layers for all locations that Earth+ will
download during one ground contact.
Guaranteed downloading: As some changed tiles will
not be downloaded to the ground by Earth+ (§4.3), Earth+
performs guaranteed downloading that downloads cloudfree imagery in its entirety at a low frequency (once every
month).

6

EVALUATION

In this section, we pick two state-of-the-art satellite imagery
compression systems as our baseline and evaluate Earth+
against on two satellite imagery datasets. The key takeaway
of our evaluation is three-fold:
• Compared to the state-of-the-art onboard compression
schemes, Earth+ reduces the downlink bandwidth usage
by 1.3-3.3× without hurting the imagery quality on all
bands.
• These improvements are achieved without using more
uplink bandwidth than currently available, or more compute or storage resources than the baselines.
• With more satellites in a constellation, Earth+ can further
reduce the amount of downlink bandwidth usage.

6.1

Experimental setup

Dataset: We evaluate Earth+ on two datasets (Table 2 illustrates the details of these two datasets):
• Rich-content dataset: we collect 1-year images on 11
geographical locations in Washington State (where each
location is of size 1600 km2 ) from Sentinel-2 dataset [40].
We sample images from Washington State as it contains
a wide variety of geographical contexts, including fluvial
landscapes, agricultural areas with varied irrigation systems, mountainous regions with large elevation changes,
etc, as shown in Figure 10a-e.
9

Why using this dataset
Planet
Sentinel-2

Number of satellites
included in our dataset

Locations

Coverage of
each location

Ground sampling
distance (GSD)

Duration

Number
of bands

Cloud
coverage

48

1

36 km2

3.0 - 4.1 m

3 months

4

<5%

2

11

1600 km2

10 m

1 year

13

≤100%

Show that Earth+ saves
more downlink when
there are more satellites
Test Earth+ on a
wide range of content

Table 2: The datasets used in our evaluation. One from Planet [40] and the other from Sentinel-2 [58].

35

r

(a) Sentinel-2 dataset

0

tte

r

tte

Be

30

Earth+
Kodan
SatRoI

Be

Earth+
Kodan
SatRoI
0
25 50 75
Downlink bandwidth (Mbps)

32

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0%

50
100
Downlink bandwidth (Mbps)
(b) Planet dataset

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

(KD) Redo sentinel-2 results Earth+ requires less
downlink bandwidth without sacrificing the image quality
(measured in PSNR). The vertical and horizontal bar shows the
standard deviation of the mean (some of the horizontal bars
are occluded as they are too short).

CDF

Figure 11:

While there is a line of work on single satellite imagery
encoders (e.g., augmenting traditional image codecs [25–
27, 46, 52, 59, 60, 73] or developing neural-based codecs such
as autoencoders [28, 30, 36, 75, 76]), Earth+ is in parallel
with this line of work (as Earth+ focuses on leveraging the
redundancy between images for further compression) and
one can use Earth+ on top of existing single satellite imagery
encoders.

6.2

SatRoI
Kodan
Earth+

CDF

PSNR (dB)

34

PSNR (dB)

(a) Sentinel-2: River
(b) Forest
(c) Mountain
(d) Agriculture
(e) City
(f) Planet: Coastal
Figure 10: Snapshots of images at sampled locations in our testing datasets, which show a variety of geographical content.

20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Percentage of downloaded tiles

SatRoI
Kodan
Earth+

25

30
35
PSNR (dB)

40

Figure 12: The CDF of the percentage of downloaded tiles and

the PSNR of Earth+ and baselines. We can see that Earth+
downloads much fewer tiles compared to the baselines while
achieving higher PSNR.
reason behind such improvement is that Earth+ uses fresh
reference images to detect and encode changes in the imagery, while Kodan needs to encode all non-cloudy regions
(including those regions that are not changed), and SatRoI
uses a fixed reference image that nearly detects all regions
as changed. Also, Earth+ has more savings on the Planet
dataset. This is because the Planet dataset contains more
than 40 satellites, while Sentinel-2 only contains two satellites, and Earth+’s constellation-wide encoding scheme can

Experimental results

Saving downlink bandwidth without hurting PSNR: We
show that Earth+ has a better PSNR–downlink demand tradeoff compared to the baselines. As shown in Figure 11a, Earth+
saves 1.3-2.0× downlink bandwidth without hurting the
PSNR of the images compared to the strongest baseline in the
Sentinel-2 dataset. Earth+ further saves downlink bandwidth
by 2.8-3.3× in the Planet dataset, as shown in Figure 11b. The
10

39
PSNR

37

Downlink saving (×)

Earth+
SatRoI
Kodan
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar
Date

Downlink saving (×)

Downloaded tiles

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Earth+
SatRoI
Kodan

35
33

3
2
1
0

4
3
2
1
0

A B C D E F G H
Sentinel-2 locations

I

J

K

B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B8a B9 B10B11B12
Sentinel-2 bands

Figure 14: The improvement of Earth+ across different locations

May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar
Date

and bands in the Sentinel-2 dataset.

Figure 13: The time series of the percentage of downloaded tiles

is better than the strongest baseline at 10 out of 11 locations.
However, Earth+ does not improve on H and has only marginal improvement on D, as these two locations are highly
snowy during winter and spring, and snow albedo (i.e., the
reflectance of snow) is constantly changing (e.g., old snow
has a lower albedo than fresh snow, and dirty snow has a
lower albedo than clean snow). Thus, Earth+ tends always to
detect changes and download those tiles that contain snow,
lowering the improvement of Earth+.
Downlink saving across different bands: We further evaluate the downlink saving of Earth+ across different bands
of the images (i.e., the downlink usage of the strongest baseline with lower PSNR than Earth+, divided by the downlink
usage of Earth+). We show the bandwidth saving of Earth+
compared to the strongest baseline. As shown in Figure 14,
Earth+ can improve on all 13 bands in Sentinel-2 images.
We also observe that the improvement of Earth+ varies between bands. We show that Earth+ can significantly improve
on ground-related bands (e.g., RGB bands B2-4) but less significantly on bands that observe the air (e.g., water vapor
bands).
Storage overhead: Based on Dove [15] constellation specification, we calculate the storage requirements for Earth+ and
two baselines. As shown in Figure 15, the onboard storage
requirements are 30 GB, 255 GB, and 24 GB for SatRoI, Kodan,
and Earth+, respectively. We note that Earth+ spends less
storage space to store the captured imagery, as Earth+ only
stores the changed tiles on-board. Further, Earth+ needs much
less storage space for reference images, as Earth+ downsamples the reference images to low resolution. This is because
Earth+ stores only changed areas on-board, thus squeezing
out storage space to store reference images.

and the PSNR of Earth+ and baselines on one location.

This is because the Planet dataset has more satellites than the
Sentinel-2 dataset, and Earth+’s constellation-wide design
can benefit from more satellites.
Figure 12 further shows the cumulative distribution of the
percentage of downloaded tiles and the PSNR of Earth+ and
baselines. For more than 60% of the images, Earth+ downloads less than 20% tiles. In contrast, the baseline needs to
download more than 80% of tiles for over 70% of images. This
is because Earth+ can effectively detect and download only
those changed tiles, while Kodan may download those cloudfree but unchanged tiles, and SatRoI cannot effectively detect
changes. Kodan needs to download all the non-cloudy areas,
and SatRoI may detect and download a lot of changed areas
because it uses an older reference frame. In contrast, Earth+
only downloads the detected changes using a fresher reference image. There are 20% of images fully downloaded by
Earth+ because of the guaranteed downloading mechanism
(§5).
Figure 13 shows an illustrative timeseries of the downloading behavior of Earth+ and the baselines for one year.
Earth+ downloads 5-10× fewer areas than the baselines most
of the time. It only occasionally performs the guaranteed
downloading that downloads the full image to keep a high
image quality.
Downlink saving across different locations: We then
calculated Earth+’s saving on the downlink (defined as the
strongest baseline with lower PSNR than Earth+, divided
by the downlink usage of Earth+) grouped by 11 different
locations in Washington State. Figure 14 shows that Earth+
11

10.0

Compression ratio (×)

Captured
Reference

Earth+
SatRoI
Kodan
0

50

100 150 200
Storage (GB)

250

Figure 15: Breaking down the storage usage of Earth+ and the

baselines. Earth+ saves changed areas on-board rather than
whole images like Kodan, which leaves some space for storing
reference images.

SatRoI

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Runtime (seconds)

1.0

to process one single satellite imagery. The runtime of Earth+
is lower than the baselines.

w/ downsampling
w/ downsampling
w/ update changes

Compression ratio
required for
current uplink capacity

1

10

100
1000
Compression ratio

0.0

d
nlohaing Earthe+llite Earth+llites Earth+llites Earth+llites arth+llites
w
o
t
t
y
D ver
te
te
te E sate
1 sa
e
2 sa
4 sa
8 sa
16

Uplink overhead: We then evaluate the effectiveness of
techniques proposed in §4.3 that reduce the update bandwidth usage based on the Sentinel-2 dataset and Dove specification. Figure 17 shows that after applying reference image downsampling and uploading the changed tiles in reference images, Earth+ compresses the reference image by
over 10000× and meets the requirement of the limited uplink
bandwidth.
Computation overhead: We also measure the runtime
that Earth+ and the baselines take to process one imagery.
We use an AMD EPYC 7452 CPU with 16 cores to test the
runtime. As shown in Figure 16, the runtime of Earth+ is the
lowest. Concretely, both Earth+ and the baselines take 0.65
seconds to encode the imagery. However, Kodan uses an expensive cloud detector that takes 0.39 seconds to run, while
Earth+ and SatRoI use the same cheap cloud detector that
only takes 0.12 seconds to run. Further, Earth+ uses downsampled reference images to detect changes, allowing the
change detection process to run faster than SatRoI’s change
detection process using full-resolution reference images.
More uplink, more improvement: The performance of
Earth+ (in terms of PSNR – downlink bandwidth trade-off)
can be further improved with more uplink capacity, as shown
in Figure 18. We highlight that Earth+ can further reduce
the downlink bandwidth usage by 22 Mbps by increasing the
uplink to 4 Mbps.
More satellites, more improvement: Earth+’s constellationwide encoding scheme allows Earth+ to compress satellite
imagery with a higher compression ratio when there are
more satellites in the constellation. To verify this, we conduct a simulation based on the Planet thumbnail images (we
use thumbnail images to bypass the quota limit of the Planet
dataset). We download these images by downloading cloudfree images in Denver from July 1st, 2023 to October 1st,
2023. As the pixel values of these thumbnail images is not
linearly correlated to the original pixel values sensed by the

Figure 16: Benchmarking the runtime of Earth+ and baselines

Uncompressed

2.5

compression ratio when more satellites are in the constellation.

Kodan
0.0

5.0

Figure 19: Earth+ can compress the images with a higher

Encoding
Cloud detection
Change detection

Earth+

7.5

10000

Figure 17: Earth+ compresses the reference image by over

10,000× so that they can fit in the limited uplink capacity,
indicated by the black vertical line.

Figure 18: Earth+ can further reduce the downlink bandwidth

usage by 22 Mbps by increasing the uplink bandwidth to 4
Mbps (as indicated by the red arrow).

12

satellite (due to visual enhancing algorithms like contrast enhancement), we instead calculate the change by normalizing
the pixel values to 0-1 and run change detection algorithms
on top of these normalized images. Those changed areas will
be downloaded to the ground. We then calculate the compression ratio based on the average changed areas (e.g., 10%
changed areas on average corresponds to 10× compression)8 .
We plot how the compression ratio (Y-axis) varies with the
number of satellites in the constellation (X-axis) in Figure 19.
We highlight that the compression ratio of Earth+ will increase from 3× to 10× when the constellation size increases
from 1 to 16.

7

8

LIMITATION

While Earth+ improves satellite imagery compression, several concerns remain.
Lossy compression: Earth+’s compression is lossy. While
it allows downloading more images, lossy compression may
not be applicable to applications that require lossless compression.
Control messages: Earth+ uses the uplink bandwidth that
is currently reserved for control messages to upload reference images. We believe this is not a serious practical concern
as the ground-to-satellite control messages (e.g., occasional
signaling) do not currently use much of the uplink bandwidth [29].
Generalization of results: Our evaluation of Earth+ focuses on a specific set of satellite specs and imagery datasets,
but it does not show how effective Earth+ would be if it is
used on other or future earth-observation satellites. We hope
our work will inspire more research to examine Earth+ in
other environments.
Deployment concerns: Though Earth+ only changes software, there may be complications in implementing Earth+ on
existing satellites as Earth+ requires a software update on the
satellite’s imagery encoding module onboard the satellite.
Stepping back, we acknowledge that Earth+ does increase
the system complexity, especially on the ground stations, including sharing downloaded images across ground stations
efficiently. However, we believe Earth+ takes an initial step
towards constellation-wide sharing of information, a fundamental capability that has broader applications than image
compression.

RELATED WORK

Single-image compression: A wide range of prior work
has focused on single-image compression by augmenting
traditional image codecs like JPEG-2000 [25–27, 46, 52, 59,
60, 73] or developing neural-based codec such as autoencoders [28, 30, 36, 75, 76]. However, this kind of work falls
short in leveraging the redundancy between images, while
satellite imagery remains largely unchanged between two
consecutive captures of the same location.
Change-based encoding: A rich set of literature aims to further compress images by detecting changes between images.
A line of work builds video-based codecs (e.g., H.264 [70],
H.265 [63], VP8 [31], VP9 [55] and autoencoders [50, 51, 71])
to leverage such redundancy, with the assumption that two
consecutive captures of one location are pixel-wise highly
similar. This is not true for satellite imagery due to varying
cloud and illumination conditions. Another line of work [61,
69] develops change-based encoding that is robust to varying
cloud and illumination conditions. However, this approach
can only update the reference image using single-satellite
information. approach only uses images available for this
one location In contrast, Earth+ allows the satellite to update
its reference image using images from all the satellites in the
same constellation, resulting in a fresher reference image
and, thus, better change-based encoding quality.
In-orbit computing: An alternative way to reduce the total
downlink capacity is to have a concrete application in mind
and drop out images that are irrelevant to this application
(e.g., Kodan [37] and OEC [38]). However, this approach may
drop out images that are crucial for other applications. In
contrast, Earth+ drops areas that are unchanged, allowing
Earth+ to be used by a wider range of applications.

9

CONCLUSION

While satellite imagery is useful for a wide range of applications, most of the imagery observed by the satellites is not
downloaded to the ground due to limited downlink capacity.
This work presents Earth+, a new onboard satellite imagery
compression system to reduce the downlink bandwidth usage. Earth+ is the first to make reference-based compression
efficient, by enabling constellation-wide sharing of fresh
reference images across satellites. To this end, Earth+ uses
several techniques to judiciously select and upload reference
images under limited uplink capacity. We show that Earth+
can compress the imagery by 3× without compromising imagery quality on all bands without using more computation
and storage resources, all while staying within existing realworld uplink constraints.

8We point out that this is a rough estimation, as in practice image codec’s

compression efficiency decreases when only encoding a small amount of
areas.
13

REFERENCES

satellite-imagery-road-segmentation-ad2964dc3812.
(Accessed
on 09/08/2023).
[1] Aqua - part of the a-train satellites | nasa. https://www.nasa.gov/
[22] Satellite images, satellite map | satellite imaging corp. https://
mission_pages/aqua/index.html. (Accessed on 09/11/2023).
www.satimagingcorp.com/gallery/high-resolution/. (Accessed on
[2] Biomass (satellite) - wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biomass_
12/06/2023).
(satellite). (Accessed on 08/20/2023).
[23] Sentinel 2 bands and combinations - gis geography.
https://
[3] Celestrak: Special data request form. https://celestrak.org/NORAD/
gisgeography.com/sentinel-2-bands-combinations/.
(Accessed
on
archives/request.php. (Accessed on 01/15/2024).
12/06/2023).
[4] Data formats - user guides - sentinel-2 msi - sentinel online - sen[24] User guides - sentinel-2 msi - resolutions - sentinel online - sentinel online. https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/user-guides/
tinel online. https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/user-guides/
sentinel-2-msi/data-formats. (Accessed on 02/02/2024).
sentinel-2-msi/resolutions. (Accessed on 09/09/2023).
[5] Environmental management, environmental monitoring | satel[25] Masud Ibn Afjal, Md Al Mamun, and Md Palash Uddin. Band reordering
lite imaging corp. https://www.satimagingcorp.com/applications/
heuristics for lossless satellite image compression with 3d-calic and
environmental-impact-studies/. (Accessed on 09/08/2023).
ccsds. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation,
[6] Esa - sentinel-2 operations. https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/
59:514–526, 2019.
Operations/Sentinel-2_operations. (Accessed on 12/04/2023).
[26] Masud Ibn Afjal, Palash Uddin, Al Mamun, and Abu Marjan. An
[7] Github - uclouvain/openjpeg: Official repository of the openjpeg
efficient lossless compression technique for remote sensing images
project. https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg. (Accessed on
using segmentation based band reordering heuristics. International
01/16/2024).
Journal of Remote Sensing, 42(2):756–781, 2021.
[8] Global forest area 2020 | statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/
[27] Bruno Aiazzi, Luciano Alparone, Stefano Baronti, and Cinzia Lastri.
1292175/global-forest-area/. (Accessed on 08/20/2023).
Crisp and fuzzy adaptive spectral predictions for lossless and near[9] How much do satellites cost? - how satellites work | howstufflossless compression of hyperspectral imagery. IEEE Geoscience and
works.
https://science.howstuffworks.com/satellite10.htm#:
Remote Sensing Letters, 4(4):532–536, 2007.
~:text=A%20typical%20weather%20satellite%20carries,of%
[28] Vinicius Alves de Oliveira, Marie Chabert, Thomas Oberlin, Charly
20maintaining%20and%20repairing%20satellites.
(Accessed on
Poulliat, Mickael Bruno, Christophe Latry, Mikael Carlavan, Simon
12/03/2023).
Henrot, Frederic Falzon, and Roberto Camarero. Reduced-complexity
[10] How much of the earth is covered by clouds? - geend-to-end variational autoencoder for on board satellite image comography
realm.
https://www.geographyrealm.com/
pression. Remote Sensing, 13(3):447, 2021.
how-much-of-the-earth-is-covered-by-clouds/.
(Accessed on
[29] Xueliang Bai, Xiaofeng Wu, and IEEE Member. 1-bit processing based
11/16/2023).
model predictive control for fractionated satellite missions. Acta As[11] How much of the ocean has been explored? : Ocean exploration facts:
tronautica, 95:37–50, 2014.
Noaa office of ocean exploration and research. https://oceanexplorer.
[30] Johannes Ballé, David Minnen, Saurabh Singh, Sung Jin Hwang, and
noaa.gov/facts/explored.html. (Accessed on 08/21/2023).
Nick Johnston. Variational image compression with a scale hyperprior.
[12] How satellite imagery is helping precision agricularXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01436, 2018.
ture grow to new heights | news | eco-business |
[31] Jim Bankoski, Paul Wilkins, and Yaowu Xu. Technical overview of
asia
pacific.
https://www.eco-business.com/news/
how-satellite-imagery-is-helping-precision-agriculture-grow-to-new-heights/. VP8, an open source video codec for the web. In 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2011.
(Accessed on 12/03/2023).
[32] Marco Cagnazzo, Sara Parrilli, Giovanni Poggi, and Luisa Verdo[13] Kakadu software. https://kakadusoftware.com/. (Accessed on
liva. Costs and advantages of object-based image coding with shape09/05/2023).
adaptive wavelet transform. EURASIP Journal on Image and Video
[14] leoconn_2021_day1_kiruthika.pdf. https://leoconn.github.io/slides/
Processing, 2007:1–13, 2007.
leoconn_2021_day1_kiruthika.pdf. (Accessed on 09/10/2023).
[33] Shkelzen Cakaj, Bexhet Kamo, Algenti Lala, and Alban Rakipi. The
[15] Planet | insights - our constellations. https://www.planet.com/
coverage analysis for low earth orbiting satellites at low elevation.
our-constellations/. (Accessed on 08/30/2023).
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
[16] Planet_fusion_specification_v1.0.0. https://assets.planet.com/docs/
5(6), 2014.
Fusion-Tech-Spec_v1.0.0.pdf. (Accessed on 11/09/2023).
[34] Tiffany Yu-Han Chen, Lenin Ravindranath, Shuo Deng, Paramvir Bahl,
[17] Planetscope - high-resolution satellite imagery source | pacgeo.com.
and Hari Balakrishnan. Glimpse: Continuous, real-time object recoghttps://pacgeo.com/satellite/planetscope/. (Accessed on 02/02/2024).
nition on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference
[18] Planetscope2
imagery
available
in
the
planet
on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, pages 155–168, 2015.
platform.
https://www.planet.com/pulse/
[35]
Yang
Cunjian, Wang Siyuan, Zhang Zengxiang, Huang Shifeng, et al.
planetscope2-imagery-available-in-the-planet-platform/.
(AcExtracting the flood extent from satellite SAR image with the support
cessed on 02/02/2024).
of topographic data. In 2001 International Conferences on Info-Tech and
[19] Precision agriculture imaging with planet satellite soInfo-Net. Proceedings (Cat. No. 01EX479), volume 1, pages 87–92. Ieee,
lutions
|
planet.
https://www.planet.com/markets/
2001.
monitoring-for-precision-agriculture/https://www.planet.com/
[36] Vinicius Alves de Oliveira, Marie Chabert, Thomas Oberlin, Charly
markets/monitoring-for-precision-agriculture/.
(Accessed on
Poulliat, Mickael Bruno, Christophe Latry, Mikael Carlavan, Simon
09/08/2023).
Henrot, Frederic Falzon, and Roberto Camarero. Satellite image com[20] Precision agriculture imaging with planet satellite sopression and denoising with neural networks. IEEE Geoscience and
lutions
|
planet.
https://www.planet.com/markets/
Remote Sensing Letters, 19:1–5, 2022.
monitoring-for-precision-agriculture/. (Accessed on 12/03/2023).
[37]
Bradley Denby, Krishna Chintalapudi, Ranveer Chandra, Brandon
[21] Satellite
imagery
road
segmentation
|
by
nithish
Lucia, and Shadi Noghabi. Kodan: Addressing the computational
|
medium.
https://medium.com/@nithishmailme/
bottleneck in space. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
14

Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3, pages 392–403, 2023.
[38] Bradley Denby and Brandon Lucia. Orbital edge computing: Nanosatellite constellations as a new class of computer system. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pages 939–954, 2020.
[39] Kiruthika Devaraj, Ryan Kingsbury, Matt Ligon, Joseph Breu, Vivek
Vittaldev, Bryan Klofas, Patrick Yeon, and Kyle Colton. Dove high
speed downlink system. 2017.
[40] Matthias Drusch, Umberto Del Bello, Sébastien Carlier, Olivier Colin,
Veronica Fernandez, Ferran Gascon, Bianca Hoersch, Claudia Isola,
Paolo Laberinti, Philippe Martimort, et al. Sentinel-2: Esa’s optical
high-resolution mission for gmes operational services. Remote sensing
of Environment, 120:25–36, 2012.
[41] Lilian N Faria, Leila MG Fonseca, and Max HM Costa. Performance
evaluation of data compression systems applied to satellite imagery.
Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2012:18–18, 2012.
[42] Sajid Ghuffar. Dem generation from multi satellite planetscope imagery. Remote Sensing, 10(9):1462, 2018.
[43] KS Gunasheela and HS Prasantha. Satellite image compression-detailed
survey of the algorithms. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Cognition and Recognition: ICCR 2016, pages 187–198. Springer, 2018.
[44] Tobias B Hank, Katja Berger, Heike Bach, Jan GPW Clevers, Anatoly Gitelson, Pablo Zarco-Tejada, and Wolfram Mauser. Spaceborne
imaging spectroscopy for sustainable agriculture: Contributions and
challenges. Surveys in Geophysics, 40(3):515–551, 2019.
[45] A Indradjad, Ali Syahputra Nasution, Hidayat Gunawan, and Ayom
Widipaminto. A comparison of satellite image compression methods in
the wavelet domain. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science, volume 280, page 012031. IOP Publishing, 2019.
[46] Sushil K Jain and Donald A Adjeroh. Edge-based prediction for lossless compression of hyperspectral images. In 2007 Data Compression
Conference (DCC’07), pages 153–162. IEEE, 2007.
[47] George Kopsiaftis and Konstantinos Karantzalos. Vehicle detection and
traffic density monitoring from very high resolution satellite video data.
In 2015 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
(IGARSS), pages 1881–1884. IEEE, 2015.
[48] F Li, V Lukin, G Proskura, I Vasilyeva, and G Chernova. Image classification accuracy analysis for three-channel remote sensing data. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Intelligent Information Technologies & Systems of Information Security (IntellTSIS 2022),
Khmelnytskyi, Ukraine, pages 505–519, 2022.
[49] Yuanqi Li, Arthi Padmanabhan, Pengzhan Zhao, Yufei Wang, Guoqing Harry Xu, and Ravi Netravali. Reducto: On-camera filtering
for resource-efficient real-time video analytics. In Proceedings of the
Annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols
for computer communication, pages 359–376, 2020.
[50] Guo Lu, Wanli Ouyang, Dong Xu, Xiaoyun Zhang, Chunlei Cai, and
Zhiyong Gao. Dvc: An end-to-end deep video compression framework.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 11006–11015, 2019.
[51] Guo Lu, Xiaoyun Zhang, Wanli Ouyang, Li Chen, Zhiyong Gao, and
Dong Xu. An end-to-end learning framework for video compression. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
43(10):3292–3308, 2021.
[52] Enrico Magli, Gabriella Olmo, and Emanuele Quacchio. Optimized
onboard lossless and near-lossless compression of hyperspectral data
using calic. IEEE Geoscience and remote sensing letters, 1(1):21–25, 2004.
[53] Salvatore Manfreda, Matthew F McCabe, Pauline E Miller, Richard
Lucas, Victor Pajuelo Madrigal, Giorgos Mallinis, Eyal Ben Dor, David

Helman, Lyndon Estes, Giuseppe Ciraolo, et al. On the use of unmanned aerial systems for environmental monitoring. Remote sensing,
10(4):641, 2018.
[54] Jonathan C McDowell. The low earth orbit satellite population and
impacts of the spacex starlink constellation. The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 892(2):L36, 2020.
[55] Debargha Mukherjee, Jim Bankoski, Adrian Grange, Jingning Han,
John Koleszar, Paul Wilkins, Yaowu Xu, and Ronald Bultje. The latest
open-source video codec vp9-an overview and preliminary results. In
2013 Picture Coding Symposium (PCS), pages 390–393. IEEE, 2013.
[56] David J Mulla. Twenty five years of remote sensing in precision
agriculture: Key advances and remaining knowledge gaps. Biosystems
engineering, 114(4):358–371, 2013.
[57] Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Dat Hoang, Minh Tam Pham, Tuyet Trinh
Vu, Thanh Hung Nguyen, Quyet-Thang Huynh, and Jun Jo. Monitoring
agriculture areas with satellite images and deep learning. Applied Soft
Computing, 95:106565, 2020.
[58] Planet Labs PBC. Planet application program interface: In space for
life on earth, 2018–.
[59] Barbara Penna, Tammam Tillo, Enrico Magli, and Gabriella Olmo.
Progressive 3-d coding of hyperspectral images based on jpeg 2000.
IEEE Geoscience and remote sensing letters, 3(1):125–129, 2006.
[60] Francesco Rizzo, Bruno Carpentieri, Giovanni Motta, and James A
Storer. Low-complexity lossless compression of hyperspectral imagery
via linear prediction. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 12(2):138–141, 2005.
[61] Christofer Schwartz, Ingo Sander, Fredrik Bruhn, Mathias Persson,
Joakim Ekblad, and Christer Fuglesang. Satellite image compression
guided by regions of interest. Sensors, 23(2):730, 2023.
[62] Halah Saadoon Shihab, Suhaidi Shafie, Abdul Rahman Ramli, and
Fauzan Ahmad. Enhancement of satellite image compression using a
hybrid (dwt–dct) algorithm. Sensing and Imaging, 18:1–30, 2017.
[63] Gary J Sullivan, Jens-Rainer Ohm, Woo-Jin Han, and Thomas Wiegand.
Overview of the high efficiency video coding (hevc) standard. IEEE
Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology, 22(12):1649–
1668, 2012.
[64] Bill Tao, Om Chabra, Ishani Janveja, Indranil Gupta, and Deepak Vasisht. Known knowns and unknowns: Near-realtime earth observation
via query bifurcation in serval.
[65] Siva Priya Thiagarajah, Shamini Pillay, Shalini Darmaraju, Rajamani
Subramanian, and Michelle Foo May Fung. The effect of rain attenuation on s-band terrestrial links. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on Wireless
Technology & Applications (ISWTA), pages 192–197. IEEE, 2013.
[66] David M Tralli, Ronald G Blom, Victor Zlotnicki, Andrea Donnellan,
and Diane L Evans. Satellite remote sensing of earthquake, volcano,
flood, landslide and coastal inundation hazards. ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 59(4):185–198, 2005.
[67] Compton J Tucker and John RG Townshend. Strategies for monitoring
tropical deforestation using satellite data. International Journal of
Remote Sensing, 21(6-7):1461–1471, 2000.
[68] Adam Van Etten, Dave Lindenbaum, and Todd M Bacastow. Spacenet:
A remote sensing dataset and challenge series. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.01232, 2018.
[69] Xu Wang, Ruimin Hu, Zhongyuan Wang, and Jing Xiao. Virtual
background reference frame based satellite video coding. IEEE Signal
Processing Letters, 25(10):1445–1449, 2018.
[70] Thomas Wiegand, Gary J Sullivan, Gisle Bjontegaard, and Ajay Luthra.
Overview of the h. 264/avc video coding standard. IEEE Transactions
on circuits and systems for video technology, 13(7):560–576, 2003.
[71] Ren Yang, Fabian Mentzer, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Learning
for video compression with hierarchical quality and recurrent enhancement. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 6628–6637, 2020.
15

The storage space required to store this 𝑎 km2 imagery is
thus 0.87𝑎 MB, where the coefficient 0.87 is the megabytes
required to encode 1km2 area, estimated by the fact that
each image captured by Doves constellation is 300 MB, with
a resolution of 6600×4400 and a ground sampling distance
of 3 𝑚. Thus, the storage space used to store captured imagery is approximately 2 × 0.87𝑎 MB, where this 2× factor
is because the ground keeps the captured imagery for two
consecutive ground contacts to make sure the downloading
is successful [14]. Earth+ stores the reference images of all
locations that each satellite will download, totaling at most
160𝑎 km2 , since the satellite revisits the same location once
every 10-15 days [24] and the maximum amount of ground
contact it can have is 240 times, assuming that the satellite
can have ground contact during every 90-minute orbit. Since
Earth+’s downsampling technique compresses the reference
images by 2601×. As a result, the total storage space for reference images is at most 0.08𝑎𝑀𝐵, 9% of the space for storing
captured imagery.

[72] Xiajun Yang, CP Lo, et al. Relative radiometric normalization performance for change detection from multi-date satellite images. Photogrammetric engineering and remote sensing, 66(8):967–980, 2000.
[73] Jing Zhang and Guizhong Liu. An efficient reordering predictionbased lossless compression algorithm for hyperspectral images. IEEE
Geoscience and remote sensing letters, 4(2):283–287, 2007.
[74] Mingmin Zhao, Peder Olsen, and Ranveer Chandra. Seeing through
clouds in satellite images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing, 2023.
[75] Lei Zhou, Chunlei Cai, Yue Gao, Sanbao Su, and Junmin Wu. Variational autoencoder for low bit-rate image compression. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, pages 2617–2620, 2018.
[76] Lei Zhou, Zhenhong Sun, Xiangji Wu, and Junmin Wu. End-to-end
optimized image compression with attention mechanism. In CVPR
workshops, page 0, 2019.

A

ESTIMATING THE STORAGE
OVERHEAD OF EARTH+

We take the technical specification of DOVEs constellation
to estimate this overhead. We first estimate the space required for storing captured images. Let the area that the
satellite can download during one ground contact be 𝑎 km2 .

16

