Micro Blossom: Accelerated Minimum-Weight Perfect
Matching Decoding for Quantum Error Correction
Yue Wu

Namitha Liyanage

Lin Zhong

yue.wu@yale.edu
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut, USA

namitha.liyanage@yale.edu
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut, USA

lin.zhong@yale.edu
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut, USA

arXiv:2502.14787v1 [cs.AR] 20 Feb 2025

Abstract
Minimum-Weight Perfect Matching (MWPM) decoding is
important to quantum error correction decoding because
of its accuracy. However, many believe that it is difficult, if
possible at all, to achieve the microsecond latency requirement posed by superconducting qubits. This work presents
the first publicly known MWPM decoder, called Micro Blossom, that achieves sub-microsecond decoding latency. Micro
Blossom employs a heterogeneous architecture that carefully partitions a state-of-the-art MWPM decoder between
software and a programmable accelerator with parallel processing units, one of each vertex/edge of the decoding graph.
On a surface code with code distance 𝑑 and a circuit-level
noise model with physical error rate 𝑝, Micro Blossom’s accelerator employs 𝑂 (𝑑 3 ) parallel processing units to reduce
the worst-case latency from 𝑂 (𝑑 12 ) to 𝑂 (𝑑 9 ) and reduce the
average latency from 𝑂 (𝑝𝑑 3 + 1) to 𝑂 (𝑝 2𝑑 2 + 1) when 𝑝 ≪ 1.
We report a prototype implementation of Micro Blossom
using FPGA. Measured at 𝑑 = 13 and 𝑝 = 0.1%, the prototype
achieves an average decoding latency of 0.8 𝜇s at a moderate clock frequency of 62 MHz. Micro Blossom is the first
publicly known hardware-accelerated exact MWPM decoder,
and the decoding latency of 0.8 𝜇s is 8 times shorter than the
best latency of MWPM decoder implementations reported
in the literature.
Keywords: Minimum-Weight Perfect Matching (MWPM)
Decoder, Quantum Error Correction, Heterogeneous Architecture

1

Introduction

Quantum error correction (QEC) plays an important role
in building fault-tolerant quantum computers. It requires a
decoder that processes syndromes, potentially measured 106
times per second, to discover qubit errors timely, within a
microsecond [2] in the case of implementing fault-tolerant
logical 𝑇ˆ gates [19]. For surface codes, an important class of
QEC codes, the most-likely error decoding problem can be
formulated as a Minimum-Weight Perfect Matching (MWPM)
problem [12] associated with a syndrome graph [40], under
the assumption of a noise model of independently distributed
bit and phase flips, and can be solved by the famous blossom
algorithm [13, 24].

In recent years, many MPWM decoder implementations
have been implemented in response to high throughput and
low latency requirements. Sparse Blossom [17] and Parity
Blossom [42] reduce the time complexity of MWPM decoding
by adapting the blossom algorithm to work on the decoding
graph. Fusion Blossom [42] improves throughput by using
multiple cores to process blocks of syndrome measurement
rounds in parallel. None of these exact MWPM decoders
achieve a decoding latency close to a microsecond or leverage any hardware acceleration. In fact, it is believed [38]
that the blossom algorithm [13, 24], which underpins all
these MWPM decoders, is too complex for hardware acceleration. Not surprisingly, many have resorted to less accurate
decoders that approximate MWPM decoding [3, 25, 38], causing 1.7x [25] or even 13.9x [3] more logical errors at code
distance 𝑑 = 13 and physical error rate 𝑝 = 0.1%.
In this work, we present the first publicly known exact MWPM decoder that achieves sub-microsecond latency,
called Micro Blossom. It is also the first publicly known exact
MWPM decoder with hardware acceleration. Micro Blossom
builds on ideas from recent fast decoders, namely [17, 42],
to implement the blossom algorithm and support stream
decoding. Micro Blossom carefully partitions the blossom
algorithm between software and a programmable accelerator
of parallel processing units (PUs), one corresponding to each
vertex and edge in the decoding graph (§3). It implements
the primal phase of the blossom algorithm in software that
flexibly handles complex data structures. It implements the
dual phase in the programmable accelerator that exploits the
finest-grained parallelism of the decoding graph in vertices
and edges (§4). To reduce the expensive software-hardware
interaction, Micro Blossom uses parallel PUs to resolve common Conflicts without involving the primal phase on the
CPU (§5). To support low-latency stream decoding, Micro
Blossom performs round-wise fusion with the parallel PUs
in the accelerator (§6).
Using SpinalHDL [29], we implement a parameterized
prototype of Micro Blossom that takes an arbitrary decoding
graph as input and produces synthesizable Verilog code (§7).
When running the accelerator on a Xilinx Versal VMK180
FPGA, our prototype achieves an average decoding latency
of 0.8 𝜇s for code distance 𝑑 = 13 and physical error rate
𝑝 = 0.1% in a circuit-level noise (§8). It is the first publicly
known MWPM decoder with sub-𝜇𝑠 latency, 8x shorter than

