HyperHammer: Breaking Free from
KVM-Enforced Isolation
Wei Chen

Zhi Zhang∗

Xin Zhang

harlwei@outlook.com
Peking University
Beijing, China

zhi.zhang@uwa.edu.au
University of Western Australia
Perth, Australia

zhangxin00@stu.pku.edu.cn
Peking University
Beijing, China

Qingni Shen∗

Yuval Yarom

Daniel Genkin

qingnishen@ss.pku.edu.cn
Peking University
Beijing, China

yuval.yarom@rub.de
Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany

genkin@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, United States

Chen Yan
yanchen1302@gmail.com
Peking University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Hardware-assisted virtualization is a key enabler of modern cloud. It decouples virtual machine execution from the
hardware it runs on, allowing increased flexibility through
services such as dynamic hardware provisioning and live
migration. Underlying this flexibility is the security promise
that guest virtual machines are isolated from each other.
However, due to the level of sharing between VMs, hardware
vulnerabilities present a serious threat to this usage. One
such vulnerability is Rowhammer, which allows attackers to
modify the contents of memory to which they have no access.
While the attack has been known for over a decade, published
application against such environments is limited, compromising only co-resident VMs, but not the hypervisor. Moreover,
due to security concerns, a key component enabling their
attack has been disabled. Hence, this attack is no longer
applicable in a contemporary virtualized environment.
In this paper, we examine how Rowhammer can affect virtualized systems. We present HyperHammer, a Rowhammer
attack that breaks hypervisor-enforced memory isolation
∗ Corresponding authors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716002

Zhe Wang
wangzhe12@ict.ac.cn
SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences & Zhongguancun Laboratory
Beijing, China
and further compromises the hypervisor. Due to the highlyspecific system requirements for leveraging Rowhammer
bit flips, HyperHammer is demonstrated on a very particular system configuration. Therefore, as demonstrated, HyperHammer is more a proof-of-concept than an immediate
threat to computer systems. Nonetheless, our work demonstrates that hardware-assisted virtualization does not fully
protect the hypervisor, and that with sufficient engineering
a determined attacker might achieve complete hypervisor
compromise.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Virtualization
and security.
Keywords: Hardware-assisted Virtualization, KVM, Memory Isolation, Rowhammer, Hypervisor Compromise
ACM Reference Format:
Wei Chen, Zhi Zhang, Xin Zhang, Qingni Shen, Yuval Yarom, Daniel
Genkin, Chen Yan, and Zhe Wang. 2025. HyperHammer: Breaking
Free from KVM-Enforced Isolation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March
30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716002

1

Introduction

Hardware-assisted virtualization allows cloud providers
to efficiently share physical hardware among multiple users
while keeping their workloads isolated. In a typical installation, the resources of a host machine are shared among multiple guest virtual machines (VMs) or hardware-assisted virtual
machines (HVMs), which are unaware they are not running
directly on physical hardware. A hypervisor software, running on the host, manages the guest VMs and provisions the
host’s resources among them. Thus, the hypervisor controls

