arXiv:2503.05197v1 [cs.AR] 7 Mar 2025

StreamGrid: Streaming Point Cloud Analytics via
Compulsory Splitting and Deterministic Termination
Yu Feng∗†

Zheng Liu∗

Weikai Lin∗

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
y-feng@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
distilledw@sjtu.edu.cn

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY, USA
wlin33@ur.rochester.edu

Zihan Liu

Jingwen Leng†

Minyi Guo

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
altair.liu@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
leng-jw@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Shanghai, China
guo-my@sjtu.edu.cn

Zhezhi He

Jieru Zhao

Yuhao Zhu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
zhezhi.he@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
zhao-jieru@sjtu.edu.cn

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY, USA
yzhu@rochester.edu

Abstract
Point clouds are increasingly important in intelligent applications, but frequent off-chip memory traffic in accelerators
causes pipeline stalls and leads to high energy consumption.
While conventional line buffer techniques can eliminate offchip traffic, they cannot be directly applied to point clouds
due to their inherent computation patterns. To address this,
we introduce two techniques: compulsory splitting and deterministic termination, enabling fully-streaming processing.
We further propose StreamGrid, a framework that integrates these techniques and automatically optimizes on-chip
buffer sizes. Our evaluation shows StreamGrid reduces onchip memory by 61.3% and energy consumption by 40.5%
with marginal accuracy loss compared to the baselines without our techniques. Additionally, we achieve 10.0× speedup
and 3.9× energy efficiency over state-of-the-art accelerators.
Keywords: Hardware Accelerator, Streaming Architecture,
Line Buffer, Point Cloud Analytics.

1

Introduction

In recent years, point clouds have emerged as one of the
primary modalities in intelligent applications [22, 41]. Their
versatility has enabled widespread adoption across numerous domains, including autonomous driving [9, 16], robotics [44], 3D modeling [26], and augmented reality [45]. These
algorithmic advancements have also spurred the development of various domain-specific accelerators in the hardware
community to improve the efficiency of point cloud processing [13, 18, 23, 35, 51, 53, 55].
∗ All authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding Authors.

Despite significant progress in point cloud accelerators,
one fundamental issue remains unaddressed: frequent offchip memory traffic. Unlike image signal processing, where
line-buffered accelerators [8, 25, 46, 48] effectively store intermediate results and minimize off-chip traffic, point cloud
accelerator designs often rely on double buffering to possibly
hide off-chip latency when reading/writing the intermediate
data between stages [18, 35, 55]. Although this approach can
have performance guarantees, it leads to substantial energy
consumption, particularly for mobile devices, as the off-chip
memory access energy is orders of magnitude higher than
the on-chip one [19, 52].
Line buffer techniques work well in image signal processing because these applications primarily involve stencil operations. Each output element often relies on nearby data and
exhibits fixed processing patterns, requiring only minimal
buffering between stages.
In contrast, operations in point cloud applications are
more diverse. They can be classified into two main categories: those with local data dependencies and those with
global data dependencies (Sec. 2). Global data dependencies imply that a single output point may need to access
all input data points. Due to those operations with global
dependencies, applying line buffer techniques directly to
point cloud applications would result in unaffordable onchip buffer sizes, as the worst-case scenario would require
buffering all intermediate data on-chip.
Additionally, line buffer techniques require deterministic throughput and memory access patterns for each stage.
However, most operations with global dependencies are nondeterministic in point cloud applications. This means that

their throughput is input-dependent, making it impossible
to determine the optimal line buffer size offline.
Main Ideas. We propose two principle techniques to address these issues and evaluate them across four application
domains to ensure minimal impact on application accuracy
(Sec. 4). First, we introduce compulsory splitting, which partitions the original point cloud data into smaller chunks and
intentionally relaxes some data dependencies across chunks,
allowing each chunk to be processed independently. This
approach significantly reduces on-chip buffer requirements
and enables finer-grained pipelining across multiple chunks.
Second, we propose deterministic termination, which converts non-deterministic operations into deterministic ones
by setting a fixed termination “deadline” for each operation.
This forces operations to terminate after a predefined number of steps, ensuring that the delays of non-deterministic
operations are no longer input-dependent.
Coupled with these two techniques, we propose an integrated co-training procedure that incorporates our proposed
algorithmic behaviors into the training process. This ensures
that co-trained models remain robust against these algorithmic modifications with only marginal accuracy loss.
Framework. The two techniques above relax the global
dependencies in point cloud algorithms and convert nondeterministic point cloud pipelines into deterministic ones,
enabling pipelining across different stages. The remaining
challenge is to determine the minimal line buffer sizes between stages. To address this, we propose StreamGrid, a
unified framework for point cloud applications, which automatically searches for optimal line buffer sizes (Fig. 1).
To accommodate a wide range of point cloud operations,
we provide an abstract interface that allows users to describe
dataflow graphs of the algorithms without specifying the
operation details (Sec. 6). We then extract data dependencies
and communication patterns from the users’ dataflow graphs
and form a constrained line buffer minimization problem.
Using an integer linear programming (ILP) solver, we can
solve this minimization problem and identify the optimal
on-chip buffer size under a given performance target (Sec. 5).
One key challenge in this ILP formulation is that the search
space quickly becomes unmanageable as the number of optimization parameters increases. To address this, we exploit
the monotonicity in line buffer constraints and propose a
constraint pruning method that drastically reduces the number of optimization parameters.
Result. Compared to the baselines without using our
techniques, we demonstrate that StreamGrid achieves 61.3%
on-chip memory reduction and 40.5% energy savings with
marginal accuracy loss across four application domains. We
also evaluate our techniques against five state-of-the-art accelerator designs and show that, on average, our accelerator
delivers 10.0 × speedup and 3.9× energy reduction, all with
comparable hardware resources.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We propose two techniques, compulsory splitting and
deterministic termination, that reduce on-chip buffer
requirements and regularize the non-determinism in
point cloud pipelines.
• We propose StreamGrid, the first framework leveraging line buffer techniques for point cloud, that automatically searches for minimal line buffer sizes.
• We demonstrate that StreamGrid enables streaming
architecture design with marginal accuracy loss across
four application domains.

2

Background

We first introduce the point cloud applications in Sec. 2.1,
and then explain the basics of line buffer design in Sec. 2.2.
2.1

Point Cloud-based Applications

Categories. Overall, point cloud applications can be classified into two main categories: conventional pipelines and
deep neural network (DNN)-based pipelines. While DNNbased pipelines have revolutionized many fields recently, conventional pipelines often achieve superior performance in
areas such as mapping [49], localization [34], and more [41].
These pipelines typically include operations such as filtering, sampling, and nearest neighbor search. On the other
side, DNN-based pipelines become the predominant methods
in tasks like classification, detection, and more [14, 22, 36].
Recent developments in neural rendering also utilize point
clouds as the rendering primitives in novel view synthesis
and reconstruction [11, 12, 26]. Compared to conventional
pipelines, these DNN-based methods often include additional
operations like convolutions and multilayer perceptions.
Unlike image signal processing, where the primary operations are stencil operations [8, 25, 38, 43, 46, 48], point cloud
processing tasks involve various operations. Based on data
dependency, point cloud operations can be classified into
two main categories: those with local data dependency and
those with global data dependency. Global data dependency
implies that, algorithmically, one output point potentially
requires access to all the input data points, whereas local
data dependency does not. Fig. 2 shows some examples.
Local Dependency. Operations with local data dependency, referred to as local-dependent operations, typically
involve processing points within close proximity. Examples
include elementwise operations where points are modified
independently, such as scaling or thresholding. Additional
examples are operations involving local neighbor points,
such as reduction and stencil operations, as shown in Fig. 2a.
On the left, Fig. 2a shows a reduction operation that determines the maximum value among a chain of points. On the
right, it shows a stencil operation that performs convolution operations in a sliding window fashion with a window
size of 1 × 3 and computes the curvature at each point by
incorporating two adjacent points.

StreamGrid
ComponentLevel RTL

Design Space Exploration

Our Framework
Tunable
Parameters

Algo. Transformation (Sec. 4)
Compulsory
Splitting

Algorithm
Description

Dataflow Graph (Sec. 6)

Deterministic
Termination

Data
Dependency

Optimizer (Sec. 5)

Comm.
Patterns

Constraint
Formulation

ILP
Solver

System-level
RTL
Code Gen.

RTL

Fig. 1. Our framework first takes the original algorithm description with tuneable parameters and performs the algorithmic
optimizations (Sec. 4). The transformed algorithm is then used to form a dataflow graph and perform dependency and data
reuse analyses (Sec. 6). Lastly, this graph forms a set of constraints and optimizes the optimal line buffer size using ILP (Sec. 5).
Producer Stage (S1)

Reduction

Chain0

P1 P5

P0

Chain1 P2

P11 P7

P3 P9
P10

P4

Stencil
Maximum
Gradients

P1 P5

Ch.0: P0
Ch.1: P3

P0

P2

P11 P7

P1 P5 P0

P3 P9
P10

P4

Curvature
Results

P4 P2 P3

…
…

Sorting

P3

P0 P7

Result
y-axis

P4

R0
Next
Stage

R1
R2
“3x3 Stencil”
C4 C3 C2 C1 C0
R0

Cycle
T+2

Next
Stage

R1
R2

…

P5

P1

Consumer Stage (S2)

kNN Search

x-axis
P0

Kernel
Size

…

(a) Local-dependent operations include, on the left, a reduction operation that
computes the maximum along a direction, and on the right, a 1 × 3 stencil
operation that computes the curvature of each point using 2 adjacent points.

P6

Cycle
T

Line Buﬀer (LB)
C4 C3 C2 C1 C0

P2

P6, P5, P0,
P1, P3, P2,
……

P5 P1
P4

Result
P9

P3
P10

P2 P11
P8

P1:
{P0, P3, P5}
P2:
{P3, P9, P11}
……

(b) Global-dependent operations include, on the left, a sorting operation that
sorts all points along the y-axis, and on the right, a kNN search operation
that identifies the 𝑘 nearest neighbors of a query point (e.g., 𝑃 1 and 𝑃 2 ).

C4 C3 C2 C1 C0
Cycle
T+4

R0
R1

Next
Stage

R2

Fig. 3. An example of using a 3 × 5 line buffer with a 3 × 3
stencil operation in an image processing pipeline.

Fig. 2. Point cloud operations, including those with local
data dependency and those with global data dependency.
Global Dependency. However, determining the spatial
relationships within a point cloud often involves operations
with global data dependencies that span across all points.
We refer to these operations as global-dependent operations.
In today’s point cloud applications, the primary operations
include sorting, range search, and k-nearest neighbors (kNN)
search, as shown in Tbl. 2. Fig. 2b gives some examples. On
the left, it shows a sorting operation that sorts all points along
the y-axis. On the right, Fig. 2b illustrates a kNN search,
which involves identifying the 𝑘 nearest point neighbors
within a point cloud using data structures like kd-trees [6, 57].
Note that, although operations like kNN search only need to
identify nearby points, the search process itself may require
iterating all points to obtain results as the dashed lines show.
2.2

Line Buffer

Line buffers play a crucial role in image processing accelerators, where the target pipelines primarily consist of stencil
operations [8, 25, 38, 43, 46, 48]. In these operations, the new
value of each pixel is often calculated by applying a kernel

to a neighborhood of pixels, as shown in Fig. 3. In this case,
the kernel size is 3 × 3 highlighted in green. This characteristic enables image processing accelerators to leverage line
buffers, temporarily storing the necessary rows or columns
of pixels from the producer stage. This allows the consumer
stage to access and compute the values of neighboring pixels
directly from the line buffer, enabling a streaming process
that eliminates off-chip traffic.
For instance, in Fig. 3, a “dachshund” image undergoes a
3 × 3 stencil operation. At each cycle, the producer stage, 𝑆 1 ,
generates and writes one pixel into the line buffer, 𝐿𝐵, as
highlighted by the red bounding box.
From cycle 0, 𝑆 1 continues writing pixels into 𝐿𝐵 in rowmajor order, and the consumer stage, 𝑆 2 , stays idle. Until
cycle 𝑇 , the pixel is written into 𝐿𝐵 at position ⟨𝑅2, 𝐶 1 ⟩. At
the same cycle, 𝑆 2 begins reading pixels from column 𝐶 0 of
𝐿𝐵. From this point forward, in each subsequent cycle, 𝑆 2
continues to read a column of pixels from 𝐿𝐵 until the entire
stencil computation is completed.
However, 𝑆 2 does not output results until cycle 𝑇 + 2. At
cycle 𝑇 + 2, 𝑆 2 has gathered all the required pixels for the

• Operations should ideally be local-dependent so that
all dependent data can be accommodated on-chip.
• Both the producer and consumer must have fixed
throughputs so that the minimal line buffer size can
be pre-determined offline.
• The data access pattern of each stage must be regular,
ensuring that the read/write ports required for each
line buffer can be determined without bank conflicts.

3

Challenges

Applying line buffers in point cloud applications presents
unique challenges other than their use in image processing.
Global-Dependent Operations. The first challenge is
that global-dependent operations would lead to unaffordable
on-chip buffers and disrupt fine-grained pipelining.
Unlike image processing where data dependencies are
localized, these point cloud operations potentially require
to access all points in a point cloud. As a result, the line
buffer can become too large, making it infeasible for mobile
devices. For instance, sorting operations require accessing
all the data to establish the correct order. The required buffer
size in sorting is proportional to the point cloud size. Sorting
a point cloud with half a million points using bitonic sort
requires buffering over 30 million elements, i.e., 30 MB of
on-chip buffer, which is impractical for mobile SoCs [2–4].
Another benefit of using line buffers is to achieve finegrained pipelining across stages, allowing the execution of
different stages to overlap. However, global-dependent operations disrupt the pipeline due to their data dependencies,
i.e., the global-dependent consumer must wait until all the
data from its producer are ready before it can proceed.
Non-Determinism. The second challenge is that many
point cloud operations are non-deterministic by nature. This
non-determinism leads to two key issues. First, the latency of
a non-deterministic operation is input-dependent, resulting
in variable throughput. This makes it difficult to determine
the optimal size for line buffers, as the required buffer size
between a producer and a consumer can change dynamically
based on the inputs. Second, non-deterministic operations
often exhibit irregular memory access patterns, which cause
bank conflicts, potentially stalling the entire pipeline.

Line Buﬀer

Producer
(Raw Point Cloud)

Wr
ite

ele

Bank 0

21

13

11

8

6

3

1

Bank 1

-

15

7

34

32

24

23

15

8

6

1

13

7

me

nts

Consumer
(kNN Search)

KD
trave tree
rsal tr
ac

PE0
3

PE1

Two requests to the same
bank cause bank conflicts

stencil operation (in 3 × 3 shift registers). It performs a convolution operation and writes the first output pixel to the
next processing stage. Note that, the line buffer, 𝐿𝐵, is designed only large enough to accommodate three rows of
pixels. When 𝑆 1 outputs the first element from the fourth
row, it overwrites the line buffer at position ⟨𝑅0, 𝐶 0 ⟩. This
overwrite occurs because, from cycle 𝑇 + 4, the original pixel
at ⟨𝑅0, 𝐶 0 ⟩ is no longer needed for future computations and
can be safely discarded.
To sum up, storing intermediate values in line buffers eliminates the need to write data back to off-chip memory after
each operation. However, applying this technique requires:

e

Next Stage

Fig. 4. An example of non-deterministic operations in point
cloud applications: 1) the throughput of each PE is inputdependent; 2) irregular memory access patterns can lead to
bank conflicts and pipeline stalls.
Fig. 4 gives an example of a kNN search using a kd-tree.
The producer writes the raw point cloud data into a line
buffer, and the consumer has two processing elements (PEs)
that perform kd-tree searches in parallel. In Fig. 4, each PE
follows a different tree traversal path. In this case, 𝑃𝐸 0 needs
to traverse 4 nodes, while 𝑃𝐸 1 needs to traverse 3 nodes,
leading to variation in execution steps. We profile the distribution of the number of steps in a kd-tree traversal for
a point cloud in the KITTI dataset [20], where each point
searches for 32 neighbors. The result shows the average number of steps is 8.4 × 103 with a large standard deviation of
6.8 × 103 across all points.
Additionally, Fig. 4 also shows the potential bank conflicts
that could happen as the data accesses in neighbor search
are input-dependent. In this case, both 𝑃𝐸 0 and 𝑃𝐸 1 access
different elements (1 and 3) in bank 0, causing one of the
accesses to be stalled.
To summarize, directly applying line buffers in point cloud
pipelines has two main issues. First, global-dependent operations lead to unaffordable on-chip buffers and disrupt
fine-grained pipelining. Second, the delays and memory accesses of some operations are input-dependent, resulting in
unavoidable pipeline stalls.

4

Fully-Streaming Point Cloud Processing

This section introduces two techniques to address the challenges in Sec. 3. We first describe compulsory splitting (Sec. 4.1)
to address the issues with global-dependent operations, we
then describe deterministic termination (Sec. 4.2) to address
the challenges in non-deterministic operations. Lastly, we
propose a training method that integrates both techniques
and guarantees marginal accuracy loss (Sec. 4.3).
4.1

Compulsory Splitting

Observation. Algorithmically, each output element in a
global-dependent operation has data dependencies across all
input elements. However, in practice, these elements often
interact with only a small subset of the data. This is because

StreamGrid

P7

P12

P13

P9

P15
P16

P5
P4

P1

P3

P2

P11
P10 P8

P14

64
48
32
16
0 1 4 16 64 256
Requested Neighbors

Accessed Chunks

P6 P0

Scaling, S

Range Search, R

Multilayer Perception, M

(local-dependent)

(Global-dependent)

(Local-dependent)

Original
Pipeline

S0

C1

C0

Fig. 5. One query point only Fig. 6. The average number of
accesses a limited number accessed chunks vs. the numof chunks. Here, 𝑃2 only ac- ber of requested neighbors
cesses 2 highlighted chunks. per point.
C1

LB1

LB2

Compulsory
Splitting

C2

C3
Input Point Cloud

C0

Global-Dependent
Operation

Local-Dependent
Operation

Fig. 7. An example of applying compulsory splitting to
a global-dependent operation. We first partition the point
clouds into small chunks and feed each chunk into a line
buffer. The global-dependent operation (e.g., kNN search)
reads the chunks in a 1 × 2 sliding window fashion and performs a kNN search for every two chunks.
global-dependent operations, such as kd-tree search or hierarchical sorting, inherently perform spatial partitioning
to establish local relationships between points. As a result,
these operations exhibit “local dependencies” during actual
execution. For instance, in kNN search, if we partition the
entire point cloud into 4 × 3 spatially even chunks as shown
in Fig. 5, a query point (𝑃 2 ) searching for 3 neighbors would
access only a limited subset of these chunks (2 in this case)
during the search process.
Fig. 6 shows the correlation between the average number
of accessed chunks and the number of requested neighbors
in the kNN search on the KITTI dataset. We partition the
input point cloud into 8 × 8 chunks. For each query point, as
the number of neighbors increases, the number of accessed
chunks also rises. However, even when requesting up to 256
neighbors, the average number of accessed chunks remains
low, on average 16. This shows that even global-dependent
operations only interact with a small region of data.
Idea. Leveraging this key insight, our idea is to partition
the original input data into smaller chunks, relaxing the data
dependency across chunks. In this way, we can reduce the
line buffer sizes for global-dependent operations. We call
this technique, compulsory splitting.
A naive splitting is to split the original point cloud into
completely independent chunks and process them separately.
For example, the input point cloud is divided into 4 chunks
and processed individually in Fig. 8. By doing so, we can

R1

Performance ↑

M1
R2

S2

S0

C0
C2

R3
M3

R0
M0
R1

Performance ↑

M1
S2

R2

Accuracy →

M2
S3

C3

Accuracy ↓

M2
S3

S1

C4

C1

M0

C3

C2
C2

M

R0
S1

Naive
Splitting

C1

C0

R

S

R3
M3
Time

Fig. 8. An example of applying compulsory splitting. By
splitting a point cloud into multiple chunks, we can unlock
more fine-grained parallelism. Compared to naive splitting,
our technique can preserve some data dependency across
neighboring chunks, avoiding accuracy loss.

reduce the required line buffer sizes for global-dependent
operations and have a finer-grained pipeline. However, the
main drawback of this method is that such simple partitioning is not scalable. Overly aggressive point cloud partitioning,
such as splitting a point cloud into one point per chunk, can
lead to a significant accuracy drop.
To address this, for global-dependent operations, we group
and operate multiple chunks together similar to stencil operations. As Fig. 7 shows, we split the point cloud into 4 chunks
and feed these chunks into a line buffer, 𝐿𝐵 1 . Each time, we
read one chunk, but the global-dependent operation does not
start until a group of chunks (e.g., 1 × 2 chunks) has arrived.
In this case, the global-dependent operation reads 𝐶 0 and
𝐶 1 before the kNN search starts. For the next chunk of the
kNN search, only 𝐶 2 needs to be read, as 𝐶 1 was already read
during the previous operation.
This is equivalent to partitioning the point cloud into 1 × 4
chunks and applying 1 × 2 stencil kernel with a stride of 1.
Although we use 1D stencil operation as an example, our
technique can also be extended to 2D stencil operation. This
way, we can achieve finer-grained pipelining while avoiding
accuracy drops due to overly aggressive partitioning.
Pipelining. Another advantage of compulsory splitting
is that it enables finer-grained pipelining. Fig. 8 shows a
simplified pipeline in PointNet++ [42] that includes a range
search operation, R, sandwiched between a scaling operation, S, and multilayer perception, M. By default, S and R
are executed sequentially due to the global data dependency
of R. Only the executions of R and M can be overlapped.

As shown in Fig. 8, both naive splitting and compulsory
splitting can achieve finer-grained pipelining. The key difference between these two techniques is that naive splitting isolates each chunk during the execution, its operation
accuracy is more susceptible to the number of chunks. Our
technique mimics a “coarse-grained” stencil operation and
groups adjacent chunks, e.g., 𝐶 0 and 𝐶 1 in the dashed red
box, in global-dependent operations. Since chunks like 𝐶 0 +𝐶 1
and 𝐶 1 +𝐶 2 can be processed independently, we can exploit
pipelining between them. Doing so, we can retain some data
dependency across neighboring chunks and preserve the accuracy of global-dependent operations while still retaining
finer-grained pipelining. Sec. 8.4 shows the impact of our
technique on the application performance and accuracy.
It is worth noting that the example in Fig. 8 simplifies the
execution of R by ignoring its non-deterministic behavior.
In reality, each segment of R execution (e.g., R 0 ) varies. In
Sec. 4.2, we address this non-determinism.
Split for Sorting. Compulsory splitting can be applied
to sorting as well. Since the spatial partitioning of a point
cloud already determines the sorting order of different split
chunks, sorting within each chunk naturally establishes the
overall sorting order, similar to hierarchical sorting [39].
How to Split. In practice, we split point clouds based on
their harvesting processes. For point clouds generated from
CAD models, we use spatial partitioning to divide point
clouds into spatially even chunks. For LiDAR-generated
point clouds, point cloud data are naturally serialized when
produced by the LiDAR sensor; the order in which the points
are produced exhibits locality because LiDAR scans points
sequentially. Thus, we partition the LiDAR point clouds into
even chunks (e.g., Points 1 to 𝑁 in chunk 1, and 𝑁 + 1 to 2𝑁
in chunk 2, etc.). 𝑁 is empirically chosen for performance.
When to Split. Compulsory splitting enables finer-grained
pipelining, a natural question is when to determine the number of chunks for global-dependent operations. Our strategy
is to apply uniform partitioning on the input point cloud
offline, so that all global-dependent operations in the pipeline
adhere to this uniform splitting scheme. The rationale is that
all global operations compute and establish spatial relationships between points in Cartesian coordinates, partitioning
the original point cloud also aligns with this principle. More
fine-grained splitting strategies are left for future work.
4.2

Deterministic Termination

Another challenge when applying the line buffer technique
to point cloud applications is that some global-dependent
operations, such as kNN search, are input-dependent. Inputdependent operations lead to two issues. First, the delay of
a global-dependent operation varies, making it impossible
to determine the required line buffer size between itself and
the subsequent stage offline. Second, operations like range
and kNN search involve traversing tree-like data structures,
leading to irregular memory accesses.

Tree nodes

Queries

Traversal Path
Terminated Path

Query queue

…

Q0

Q1

Q2 …… Q9

1
2

3

4
8

5
9

10

6

11

12

7

13

14

15

Fig. 9. An example of deterministic termination on kd-tree
traversal. Here, we define the termination threshold to be 5.
Different colors correspond to different query traversals. The
dashed part is early stopped by deterministic termination.
Variable Delay. To address the variable delay of globaldependent operations, we observe that, for some input data,
selectively skipping some steps can align execution delays
while yielding results that closely approximate those of the
canonical algorithms. Based on the observation, our idea is
to convert those “delay-non-deterministic” operations into
deterministic ones. Specifically, our idea imposes a termination “deadline” on each non-deterministic operation. For
example, in a kNN search, the deadline would be the number
of tree traversal steps. By setting a fixed deadline for each
operation, all processes are completed within a fixed timeframe. This way, we can determine the line buffer size offline.
We name our technique, deterministic termination.
Fig. 9 illustrates how we apply deterministic termination
to a kd-tree search. In canonical kd-tree search, each query
traverses the tree to find its nearest neighbor. For instance,
query 𝑄 0 traverses 3 steps and finds its nearest neighbor, 8 ,
while 𝑄 1 traverses 7 steps to find 13 . For each query, the
termination criterion, i.e., the number of tree traversal steps,
is dependent on the specific input.
With deterministic termination, we set a fixed deadline
for every query. For example, in Fig. 9, each query’s traversal
is capped at 5 steps. In this case, both queries 𝑄 0 and 𝑄 2
can be completed within this deadline. However, query 𝑄 1 ,
which originally required 7 steps to complete, is forced to
be terminated at step 5 and returns the search results up to
that point. This approach ensures uniform processing times
across queries, which allows the minimal line buffer size to
be predetermined and fixed throughout execution.
Another question to this approach is to determine an appropriate termination deadline for each operation. In our
experiment, we establish these termination deadlines based
on offline profiling. Our results show that setting a termination deadline for point cloud operations does not affect the
results after an integrated co-training procedure described
in Sec. 4.3. More exhaustive approaches to determine the
deadlines are left for future work.
Irregular Memory Access. The second issue with inputdependent operations is that they often involve irregular data

StreamGrid
Gradient
flow
Local Ops.
Global-Dependency Operations
Deterministic
Skipping

Bank Conflict
Elision

……

Input

Local Ops.

Loss

Global-Dependency Operations
Deterministic
Skipping

Bank Conflict
Elision

optimization asks users to define the data dependency and
communication pattern of each stage in the dataflow graphs.
The optimization goal is to achieve the highest throughput
while minimizing the overall on-chip buffer size.
Requirements. To achieve this goal, our framework must
meet three requirements:
• First, any input elements read by a consumer stage
must be produced by a preceding producer stage and
be available in the line buffer.
• Second, once data is read from off-chip memory, it
will not be written back to the off-chip memory until
all computations are complete.
• Third, the pipeline must ensure that there are no onchip memory stalls during the entire execution, simplifying the control logic.

Fig. 10. Our training procedure integrates our proposed techniques. Although our techniques are not differentiable, the
back-propagation does not flow through our optimizations.
access, such as kd-tree traversal. Due to the input-dependent
nature of memory access patterns, any offline data layout
optimization cannot fully eliminate on-chip bank conflicts.
Although a few techniques in the literature address on-chip
bank conflicts [5, 27], we address bank conflicts by adopting
a simple strategy, the bank conflict elision technique from
Crescent [13]. Whenever there is a bank conflict, only one of
the requests is allowed to proceed. The remaining requests
bypass the rest of the data structure beneath the conflict
node. Hence, we claim no contribution to this end.
4.3

Integrated Co-Training

Coupled with our two algorithmic optimizations, we also
proposed a co-training procedure to mitigate the potential
accuracy loss from these optimizations, as shown in Fig. 10.
Specifically, we integrate both algorithmic behaviors into the
training process. However, a challenge in this integration is
that simulating compulsory splitting and deterministic termination are not differentiable. Our observation is that, in point
cloud applications, global-dependent operations are used to
establish relationships between points rather than directly
manipulate point values. Thus, we can simulate these optimizations during training without concern for their differentiability. The back-propagation gradient flows only through
the local-dependent operations, not the global-dependent
operations. Sec. 8.1 presents an accuracy comparison with
and without our co-training procedure.

5

Line Buffer Optimization

Our techniques in Sec. 4 relax the global dependencies in
point cloud algorithms and convert non-deterministic point
cloud pipelines into deterministic ones. This conversion enables fine-grained pipelining across stages. However, given
a converted point cloud pipeline, the remaining challenge is
to determine the minimal on-chip buffer size while ensuring
that intermediate off-chip traffic is eliminated.
Sec. 5.1 describes the general idea and algorithmic requirements behind our line buffer optimization. Sec. 5.2 describes
how to formulate the optimization into an ILP problem.
5.1

General Idea

Goal. Similar to prior works on image processing [8, 25,
43], we define point cloud pipelines as dataflow graphs. Our

With these requirements, we describe our hierarchical
optimization. Recall, our algorithm splits the point cloud into
multiple chunks. For example, in Fig. 8, 𝐶 0 and 𝐶 1 are one
chunk in compulsory splitting. For a single-chunk processing
pipeline, our framework ensures the highest throughput
while minimizing the on-chip buffer size. For each producerconsumer pair, the consumer is delayed by a specific number
of cycles to ensure that, once it starts computing, all data
dependencies are resolved, allowing it never to stall.
Once the line buffer sizes for a single-chunk pipeline are
determined, we extend this result to multi-chunk pipelines
with the same performance target.
5.2

Optimization Formulation

Here, we first describe the ILP formulation of line buffer
optimization for a single chunk of point cloud.
Objective. The goal of our optimization is to minimize
the overall line buffer size as shown in Eqn. 1:
argmin 𝐿𝐵(Θ) =
Θ

𝑁
−1
∑︁

𝐿𝐵𝑖 (Θ),

𝑖=0

where Θ = {𝑡𝑖,𝑠 }, 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1, ..., 𝑁 − 1].

(1)

In Eqn. 1, 𝐿𝐵𝑖 (Θ) is the size of the 𝑖th line buffer between
stage 𝑆𝑖 and stage 𝑆𝑖+1 , where Θ is the overall scheduling,
i.e., the starting cycle 𝑡𝑠,𝑖 of each stage 𝑆𝑖 .
Next, we explain the two primary categories of constraints
within our formulation: buffer size constraints and data dependency constraints.
Buffer Size Constraints. For each line buffer 𝐿𝐵𝑖 , we
guarantee that any line buffer 𝐿𝐵𝑖 is large enough to accommodate all the elements during its execution. Mathematically,
each line buffer size can be expressed as:
𝐿𝐵𝑖 (Θ) =

max

𝑡 ∈ [𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 , 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 ]

{#𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 − #𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 },

(2)

where 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 denotes the timestamp when stage 𝑆𝑖 starts writing to the line buffer 𝐿𝐵𝑖 , and 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 denotes the timestamp at
the end of writing to 𝐿𝐵𝑖 . #𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 and #𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 denote the

number of element written and overwritten to 𝐿𝐵𝑖 at timestamp 𝑡, respectively. Therefore, 𝐿𝐵𝑖 needs to accomondate
(#𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 − #𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 ) number of elements at any timestamp between 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 and 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 . The constraint scope is narrowed
between 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 and 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 , because before 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 , 𝐿𝐵𝑖 contains no
elements, and after 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 , there is no more writes to 𝐿𝐵𝑖 .
Furthermore, #𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 can be expressed as:
#𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 = (𝑡 − 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 ) · 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 = (𝑡 − (𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 )) · 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 ,
(3)
where #𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 represents the product of output throughput,
𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 , of stage 𝑆𝑖 and time elapsed from 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 , which is further
defined as the sum of 𝑆𝑖 ’s starting cycle 𝑡𝑠,𝑖 and Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 ,
which is the number of stages of 𝑆𝑖 . 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 can be defined
by 𝜌𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 /𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 . 𝜌𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 is the output shape of 𝑆𝑖 and 𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 is
the output frequency of 𝑆𝑖 . Defining the output shape and
frequency of 𝑆𝑖 is required to determine the data dependency.
Similarly, #𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 can be expressed as:
#𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 = max{0, 𝑡 − 𝑡𝑜,𝑖 } · 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1,

(4)

where 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 is the input throughput of stage 𝑆𝑖+1 . Whereas,
𝑡𝑜,𝑖 , the time at which elements start to be overwritten in 𝐿𝐵𝑖
is a function of the data dependency of the given operation:
𝑡𝑜,𝑖 = max{F (𝑐)},
𝑐 ∈ C𝑖
(
𝑡𝑠,𝑐 , if 𝑆𝑖 is local dependent,
where F (𝑐) =
𝑡𝑒,𝑐 , otherwise.

(5)

Here, C𝑖 is a collection of consumers of stage 𝑆𝑖 . If the
consumer is an operation with local data dependency, 𝑡𝑜,𝑖
only requires to be greater than the starting of the consumer,
𝑡𝑠,𝑐 , otherwise, 𝑡𝑜,𝑖 needs to be greater than the end of the
consumer, 𝑡𝑒,𝑐 , which will be explained in Eqn. 7.
Data Dependency Constraints. In addition to the line
buffer constraints, the operations also have inherent constraints determined by their data dependencies. These constraints can be categorized into those for local-dependent
operations and those for global-dependent operations.
For local-dependent operations, we need to ensure that
any element required by a later stage has already been written to the line buffer beforehand. Therefore, for each producerconsumer pair, the data dependency constraint can be generalized as follows:
∀𝑡 ∈ [𝑡𝑠,𝑖+1, 𝑡𝑒,𝑖+1 ], (𝑡 − (𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 )) · 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
≥ (𝑡 − (𝑡𝑠,𝑖+1 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖+1 )) · 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1, (6)
where 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 and 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 represent the output throughput of 𝑆𝑖
and the input throughput of 𝑆𝑖+1 , respectively. Eqn. 6 ensures
that the total number of elements required by the consumer
𝑆𝑖+1 is always less than or equal to the number of elements
produced by the producer 𝑆𝑖 .
Specifically, in terms of stencil operations, it is essential
to ensure that all elements required by the sliding window

Stages
w/o inserting bubbles
across chunks

w/ inserting bubbles
across chunks

S1

Bubbles
Larger
Line Buﬀer

S’1
S2

S1

S’2
S3
S’1

S2

S’2
S3

S’3
Smaller
Line Buﬀer

S’3

Fig. 11. An example of inserting bubbles across processing
different chunks. Inserting bubbles reduces the line buffer
sizes while retaining the same performance.
are available when needed:
𝜌𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
𝜌𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1
𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 =
, 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 =
,
𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
𝛽𝑖+1 · 𝑓𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1
where 𝜌𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 and 𝑓𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 are the input shape and frequency
of 𝑆𝑖+1 , respectively. 𝛽𝑖+1 represents the input reuse factor,
indicating the number of times each input element is reused
at stage 𝑆𝑖+1 .
For reduction operations, where a group of input elements
contributes to a single output, 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 and 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 can be expressed as:
𝜌𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
𝜌𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1
𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 =
, 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 =
,
𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
𝑓𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1
For global-dependent operations, where potentially all elements need to be accessed. The data dependency constraint
in Eqn. 6 needs to be modified:
𝑊𝑖
𝑡𝑒,𝑐 ≤ 𝑡𝑠,𝑖+1 ⇒ 𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 +
≤ 𝑡𝑠,𝑖+1,
(7)
𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
where 𝑊𝑖 is the total number of output elements produced
by stage 𝑆𝑖 . This can be inferred from the dataflow graph.
Eqn. 7 guarantees that ensures that all elements produced
by stage 𝑆𝑖 are available before stage 𝑆𝑖+1 starts.
Constraint Pruning. One issue with this optimization
formulation is that the line buffer constraint in Eqn. 2 and the
local-dependency constraint in Eqn. 6 impose a large number
of constraints and variables. For example, PointNet++ [42]
requires >100K constraints, making solving the optimization
infeasible. To address this, we observe that the equations
for #𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 and #𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 are monotonically increasing.
Therefore, the constraints in Eqn. 2 can be simplified into
two, one is when 𝑡 is 𝑡 𝑤,𝑖 and the other is when 𝑡 is 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 :

𝐿𝐵𝑖 (Θ) = max ((𝑡𝑜,𝑖 − (𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 )) · 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 ),
((𝑡𝑒,𝑖 − (𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 )) · 𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖 − (𝑡𝑒,𝑖 − 𝑡𝑜,𝑖 ) · 𝜏𝑖𝑛,𝑖+1 ) ,
𝑊𝑖
.
(8)
where 𝑡𝑒,𝑖 = 𝑡𝑠,𝑖 + Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖 +
𝜏𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑖
Multi-Chunk Optimization. Extending to multi-chunk
pipelines, our framework retains the same line buffer sizes
from the single-chunk optimization and keeps the same performance target. We observe that collapsing the execution
of multiple chunks into a continuous process results in a

StreamGrid

Table 1. List of symbols used in the input of our framework,
along with the mapping between the variables in the ILP
optimization and the input parameters in our interface.
Symbols
𝜌𝑖𝑛,𝑖
𝑓𝑖𝑛,𝑖
𝛽𝑖
Δ𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒,𝑖
𝜌𝑖𝑛,𝑖
𝑓𝑖𝑛,𝑖

Parameter
Names
i_shape
i_freq
reuse
stage
o_shape
o_freq

i_shape: [1, 3]
i_freq: 1,
reuse: [1, 1]

Definitions
Input shape of stage 𝑖
Input read frequency of stage 𝑖
Input reuse pattern of stage 𝑖
Number of pipelining stages of stage 𝑖
Output shape of stage 𝑖
Output written frequency of stage 𝑖

larger line buffer without providing any performance gains,
as shown in the upper part of Fig. 11. To ensure the same
on-chip buffer can accommodate all intermediate data across
chunks, we introduce bubbles at the start of stages that have
shorter execution times, e.g., 𝑆 1 and 𝑆 3 . These bubbles help
manage dataflow and prevent buffer overflows, all while
avoiding the additional on-chip resources.

6

stage = 8

Programming Interface

While our optimization described in Sec. 5 can determine
the optimal line buffer sizes given a point cloud pipeline,
it requires data dependencies and communication patterns
between stages, as outlined in Tbl. 1. However, automatically
inferring these parameters is challenging. Thus, we provide a
programming interface that allows programmers to explicitly
define these parameters.
Although there are existing line buffer optimization interfaces for image signal processing [8, 25, 46, 48], these
interfaces are designed primarily for stencil operations and
are insufficient to express the data dependencies and communication patterns specific to point cloud applications, as
shown in Sec. 2. To accommodate these diverse operations,
we propose an interface that allows users to easily define the
dataflow of their point cloud applications.
Interface. Due to the diversity in point cloud operations
in Sec. 2.1, it is hard to exhaust all the operations. Thus,
our interface provides a set of abstract operations that allow
users to define the data dependencies and communication
patterns of point cloud pipelines, without specifying the
actual computation of each operation. Fig. 12 illustrates an
example of describing a pipeline including a kNN search
operation followed by a stencil operation.
For each operation, our interface uses two key parameters: i_shape and i_freq, which define the input pattern.
i_shape specifies the input shape, while i_freq defines how
frequently this operation reads input data with the specified
input shape. The i_shape is a tuple, such as [𝑥, 𝑦], where
‘x’ represents the number of points and ‘y’ is the number of
attributes per point. Similarly, o_shape and o_freq describe
the output shape and frequency.

i_shape’: [1, 3]
o_shape: [4, 3] reuse’: [2, 1]
o_freq: 8

stage’ = 2

o_shape’:
[1, 1]

Producer (kNN Search)
global_op(
i_shape = [1,3], i_freq
reuse
= [1,1], stage
o_shape = [4,3], o_freq

Consumer (2x3 Stencil)
= 1,
= 8,
= 8)

stencil(
i_shape’ = [1,3], i_freq’
reuse’
= [2,1], stage’
o_shape’ = [1,1], o_freq’

= 1,
= 2,
= 1)

Fig. 12. An example of defining the dataflow graph using our
framework interface. Our interface allows users to define the
data dependencies and communication patterns. The greyish
parameters do not need to be defined and can be inferred
from the computation pattern.
To capture data dependencies, the reuse parameter is
used to define input reuse patterns, and stage indicates
the number of pipeline stages of the operation. The reuse
parameter is also a tuple that specifies how many times each
element is reused at each dimension.
Specifically, in Fig. 12, the 8-stage kNN search reads 1 × 3
inputs per cycle and produces 4 × 3 outputs every 8 cycles,
with no input reuse. On the other hand, the 2-stage stencil
operation performs a 2 × 3 stencil, reading 1 × 3 elements
and producing 1 × 1 outputs per cycle. Each element of a
2x3 stencil operation will be used in the first dimension as
defined by reuse parameter. The stencil operation’s input
and output frequency are implicitly defined as 1.
Supported Operations. Our framework includes a list
of abstract operations listed below, allowing users to accommodate their applications. Some parameters are not specified
as they can be inferred from the computation patterns.
# stencil operation
stencil ( i_shape , o_shape , stage , reuse )
# reduction operation
reduction ( i_shape , o_shape , stage , o_freq )
# global operation
global_op ( i_shape , o_shape , i_freq , o_freq , reuse ,
stage )

Listing 1. Programming interface.

7

Experimental Setup

Experimental Methodology. We evaluate the generated
architectures from our framework with the existing architectures. Specifically, we develop RTL implementation for
the primary IP blocks and synthesize these IP blocks using
Synposys synthesis and Cadence layout tools in TSMC 16nm
FinFET technology. We use Google’s optimization library
"OR-Tools" to solve the ILP optimization in Sec. 5 and finalize each SRAM size. The SRAMs are generated using the
Arm Artisan memory compiler. Power is estimated using
Synopsys PrimeTimePX with annotated switching activities. The DRAM parameters are modeled after Micron 16

Table 2. Evaluation benchmarks.
Cls.

Application
Domains

Algorithm

Dataset

Hardware
Baselines

Global
Dependencies

Classification

PointNet++ (c)

ModelNet10,
ModelNet40

PointAcc,
Mesorasi

Range
Search

Segmentation

PointNet++ (s)

ShapeNet

PointAcc,
Mesorasi

Range
Search

Registration

A-LOAM

KITTI

QuickNN,
Tigris

kNN
Search

Neural
Rendering

3DGS

Tank&Temple,
DeepBlending

GScore

Sorting

Fig. 13. Accuracy on classifi- Fig. 14. Accuracy comparication and segmentation.
son on registration.

8
Gb LPDDR3-1600 (4 channels) according to its datasheet [1].
Lastly, we build a cycle-level simulator of the architecture
with the latency of each component parameterized from the
post-synthesis results of the ASIC designs.
Applications. Tbl. 2 lists the applications used for evaluation across four domains: classification, segmentation, registration, and neural rendering.
For classification, we use the PointNet++(c)[42] algorithm
and evaluate on two datasets, ModelNet10[50] and ModelNet40 [50], using overall accuracy as the metric. For segmentation, we use PointNet++(s) with the ShapeNet dataset [7],
using the standard mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) as
our accuracy metric. For registration, we use the A-LOAM
algorithm [54] on the KITTI dataset [21], with end-to-end
translation and rotation errors as the accuracy metrics. For
rendering applications, we utilize 3D Gaussian splatting
(3DGS) [26] as the rendering pipeline and assess performance
on the Tank&Temple [28] and DeepBlending [24] dataset
with the standard Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) metric.
Hardware Baselines. To date, there is no single accelerator capable of supporting all the point cloud applications we
evaluated. Here, we compare five existing point cloud architectures with the design obtained from our framework. For
a fair comparison, we configure the hardware baselines with
the same amount of processing elements (PEs) and comparable on-chip buffers. For classification and segmentation tasks,
we compare two deep learning accelerators, PointAcc [35]
and Mesorasi [18]. For registration, we compare two point
cloud kNN accelerators, QuickNN [40] and Tigris [51]. Lastly,
we compare against GScore [31] on neural rendering.
Variants. We evaluate three variants in our paper:
• Base: This is a variant with no compulsory splitting
or deterministic termination.
• Base+$: This variant is similar to Base, but it replaces
line buffers with a fully-associative cache.
• CS: This variant only uses compulsory splitting without deterministic termination.
• CS+DT: This is the full-fledged version with both compulsory splitting and deterministic termination.

Seg.

Evaluation

Sec. 8.1 shows that our two optimizations bring marginal accuracy loss. Sec. 8.2 shows that, under the same throughput,
our techniques reduce on-chip buffer size and energy consumption compared to the hardware baseline. Sec. 8.3 compares against prior state-of-the-art accelerators and Sec. 8.4
shows sensitivity studies.
8.1

Accuracy

We evaluate our two techniques, compulsory splitting (CS)
and deterministic termination (DT), across four domains to
show the wide applicability of our optimizations. We describe
our setting for each task first, and unless otherwise noted,
the same setting is used throughout the evaluation.
Classification and Segmentation. Fig. 13 shows the
accuracy comparison between the baselines and our techniques on two tasks: classification and segmentation. We
split each point cloud into 3 × 3 × 1 chunks with a kernel size
of 2 × 2, which is equivalent to partitioning the point cloud
into 4 chunks. We set the termination deadline to approximately 25% of the steps compared to a full kd-tree traversal.
Applying CS alone results in an average accuracy loss of only
0.6%. By applying both techniques, CS+DT retains accuracy
loss with less than 1% (0.8% on average).
Registration. Fig. 14 shows the comparison of translational and rotational errors between our techniques and the
baseline algorithm, A-LOAM. In this task, it is equivalent to
partitioning the point cloud into 4 chunks. The termination
deadline is also 25% of the full kd-tree traversal. In Fig. 14,
our approach introduces marginal accuracy loss compared
to the baseline algorithm. On average, we introduce only
0.01% additional translational error and no rotational error.
Rendering. Fig. 15 compares the rendering quality between our techniques and the baseline algorithm, 3DGS.
Since 3DGS rendering typically requires high storage (>1GB),
we partition the entire point cloud into 80 × 60 × 75 chunks
with a stride of 1 × 1 × 1. Because no non-deterministic operations in 3DGS, DT does not apply to 3DGS. We evaluate
our approach against two datasets and find that, on average,
we achieve similar accuracy compared to the baseline with
a negligible loss of 0.1 dB in PSNR.

StreamGrid

29.929.8

26.626.5

DB

w/o cotraining

CS

AVG.

Accuracy (%)

PSNR (dB)

Base

30
28
26
24 23.423.3
22
20
T&T

100
80
60
40
20
0

1

w/ cotraining

2 4 8
# of Chunk

16

Fig. 15. Accuracy compari- Fig. 16. Accuracy with and
son on neural rendering.
without co-training.

(a) On-chip buffer reduction.

(b) Normalized energy.

Fig. 17. On-chip buffer reduction and energy savings by
applying compulsory splitting and deterministic termination.

8.2

Buffer Reduction and Energy Savings

This section shows that our techniques can effectively reduce
the line buffer size and save energy. Note that, since our linebuffer optimization maintains the same target throughput,
thus, our techniques do not improve performance. Both our
hardware and the baseline use the same amount of compute
units, the only difference is the buffer size.
Fig. 17a shows the line buffer reductions compared to the
baselines. On average, we reduce the line buffer size by 72%.
The 3DGS result is missing as the baseline requires an infeasibly large on-chip buffer (> 1 GB), which our toolchain
could not synthesize. Fig. 17b presents the normalized energy consumption relative to the baselines. On average, we
achieve a 40.5% reduction in energy. This energy savings is
entirely attributed to the reduction in SRAM sizes.

(b) Segmentation.

(c) Registration.

(d) 3DGS.

Fig. 18. Overall performance and normalized energy comparison against prior accelerators. The legend is shared.
8.3

Integrated Co-Training. Fig. 16 shows the accuracy
comparison with and without our co-training on classification. Other tasks follow a similar trend. In Fig. 16, models without co-training can maintain high accuracy when
the number of chunks is low. However, as the number of
chunks increases, the accuracy drops rapidly. In contrast,
our co-training integrates algorithmic behavior, making the
trained model robust and capable of retaining high accuracy
even when the number of chunks is high. Note that, the cotraining overhead is 3.1× slower compared to the baseline.
This overhead is primarily due to inefficient CPU kernels
simulating DT behaviors during training. More efficient GPU
implementations are left for future work.

(a) Classification.

Prior Work Comparison

In addition to comparing against the baselines, we also evaluate our design against prior point cloud accelerators. For
a fair comparison, we ensure that both the prior works and
our design have the same number of compute resources, i.e.,
256 PEs, and a comparable overall on-chip buffer size.
Fig. 18a shows the speedup and normalized energy between CS+DT and two prior accelerators, PointAcc and
Mesorasi, on classification. Both speedup and energy metrics are normalized against Mesorasi. Our CS+DT achieves
1.4× and 2.4× speedup compared to PointAcc and Mesorasi,
respectively. We also compare against Base+$ and achieve
1.2× speedup. Because cache misses would introduce frequent pipeline stalls and off-chip traffic.
In terms of energy savings, the primary contribution comes
from reducing DRAM energy, as our streaming process eliminates intermediate off-chip traffic, resulting in a 94.4% reduction in DRAM energy. Although our CS+DT introduces additional SRAM energy due to a larger on-chip buffer (2.4 MB
vs. 257 KB), we still achieve an overall energy reduction
of 63.9% compared to PointAcc. Compared to Base+$, we
achieve 57.2% energy saving. There is no energy breakdown
of Mesorasi because some of their energy numbers are measured directly from mobile GPU. Segmentation shows a similar trend in Fig. 18b.
Fig. 18c shows the speedup and normalized energy against
two prior accelerators, Tigris and QuickNN, on a registration task. Both speedup and energy metrics are normalized
against QuickNN. Our CS+DT achieves 28.9× and 30.4×
speedup over Tigris and QuickNN, respectively. The speedup

(a) Classification.

(b) Segmentation.

Fig. 19. Sensitivity of energy and accuracy to compulsory
splitting, i.e., the number of split chunks.

primarily comes from a smaller search range enabled by
compulsory splitting and deterministic termination, as kNN
search is the main bottleneck in registration. CS+DT also
achieves 30.1% and 60.8% energy reduction over Tigris and
QuickNN due to memory savings. Compared to Base+$,
CS+DT achieves 13.1× speedup and 70.3% energy reduction.
Lastly, we show the comparison against GSCore. Values
are normalized to GSCore. Fig. 18d shows that we achieves
1.9× speedup and 22.3% energy reduction. The speedup comes
from our streaming processing. The main energy contributor
is reduced DRAM traffic. Base+$ does not apply to 3DGS
due to the infeasible on-chip buffer described in Sec. 8.2.
8.4

Sensitivity Study

Compulsory Splitting. Fig. 19 illustrates how accuracy
and energy change with different numbers of split chunks.
Here, we show the results of classification and segmentation.
We do not show the results of registration and rendering, because the number of chunks does not significantly affect the
accuracy of registration and rendering. In Fig. 19, the energy
numbers are normalized against the scenario with 4 chunks.
As the number of chunks increases, classification accuracy
shows a slight drop in Fig. 19a, thanks to our co-training
procedure. On the other hand, the normalized energy decreases significantly, as the on-chip buffer size reduces from
2.4MB at 4 chunks to 1.8MB at 16 chunks, leading to 49.6%
energy reduction. The energy reduction trend of the segmentation task is similar. However, the segmentation accuracy
drops more significantly as the number of chunks increases
to 16, as shown in Fig. 19b. This shows that the sensitivity
of accuracy to the number of chunks is task-specific.
Deterministic Termination. Fig. 20 presents the accuracy and energy sensitivity to the deterministic termination
for classification (Fig. 20a) and registration (Fig. 20b). All
results are normalized to the termination deadline to 14 of
a full kd-tree traversal. The classification accuracy changes
minimally while the registration accuracy declines as the
termination deadline decreases. However, our method still
maintains comparable accuracy when the deadline is set to 14 .

(a) Classification.

(b) Segmentation.

Fig. 20. Sensitivity of energy and accuracy to deterministic
termination.

Further shortening the deadline would lead to a significant
accuracy drop. Meanwhile, the overall energy consumption
decreases with shorter deadlines. For instance, in Fig. 20b,
the total energy reduces by 20% when the deadline decreases
from 1 to 14 while the energy reduces merely by 5% when
1
the deadline decreases further to 16
.

9

Related Work

Point Cloud Acceleration. Point cloud accelerators have
gained significant attention in the hardware community
recently, leading to many design innovations [15, 17, 18,
23, 33, 35, 37, 51, 53, 55, 56]. For instance, Mesorasi [18],
PointAcc [35], and Point-X [55] focus on efficient accelerators for DNN-based algorithms, while Crescent [13] tackles
irregular memory accesses in kNN search. QuickNN [40] and
Tigris [51] utilize hierarchical kNN search to accelerate conventional point cloud pipelines like registration. In contrast,
StreamGrid addresses the challenge of off-chip traffic by
proposing a streaming processing approach, enabling finegrained pipelining to accelerate point cloud applications.
Accelerator Design Framework. Recently, several agile
accelerator frameworks have emerged [10, 30, 32]. In the domain of image processing, frameworks such as Darkroom[25],
FixyNN[48], and SODA[8] focus on optimizing accelerators
through the use of line buffers. Spatial [29] introduces a
domain-specific language for quick accelerator design, while
DSAGEN [47] expands this approach by automatically exploring the optimal accelerator design within a large architectural design space. However, these frameworks primarily target regular computations. StreamGrid addresses the
non-determinism in point cloud computation, leveraging line
buffer techniques to optimize overall on-chip buffer size.

10

Conclusions

This paper presents StreamGrid, a framework that transforms non-deterministic, global-dependent operations into

StreamGrid

deterministic ones and enables streaming processing by leveraging line buffer techniques. StreamGrid achieves significant energy reduction and outperforms existing accelerators
while maintaining comparable task accuracy.

References
[1] Micron 178-Ball, Single-Channel Mobile LPDDR3 SDRAM Features.
[2] Nvidia jetson orin.
[3] Nvidia reveals xavier soc details.
[4] Qualcomm QCS8550/QCM8550 Processors.
[5] Peyman Afshani and Nodari Sitchinava. Sorting and permuting without bank conflicts on gpus. In Algorithms-ESA 2015: 23rd Annual
European Symposium, Patras, Greece, September 14-16, 2015, Proceedings, pages 13–24. Springer, 2015.
[6] Jon Louis Bentley. Multidimensional binary search trees used for
associative searching. Communications of the ACM, 18(9):509–517,
1975.
[7] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan,
Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song,
Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[8] Yuze Chi, Jason Cong, Peng Wei, and Peipei Zhou. Soda: Stencil
with optimized dataflow architecture. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
[9] Yaodong Cui, Ren Chen, Wenbo Chu, Long Chen, Daxin Tian, Ying
Li, and Dongpu Cao. Deep learning for image and point cloud fusion
in autonomous driving: A review. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 23(2):722–739, 2021.
[10] David Durst, Matthew Feldman, Dillon Huff, David Akeley, Ross Daly,
Gilbert Louis Bernstein, Marco Patrignani, Kayvon Fatahalian, and
Pat Hanrahan. Type-directed scheduling of streaming accelerators.
In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation, pages 408–422, 2020.
[11] Zhiwen Fan, Kevin Wang, Kairun Wen, Zehao Zhu, Dejia Xu, and
Zhangyang Wang. Lightgaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and 200+ fps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17245,
2023.
[12] Guangchi Fang and Bing Wang. Mini-splatting: Representing scenes
with a constrained number of gaussians. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 165–181. Springer, 2024.
[13] Yu Feng, Gunnar Hammonds, Yiming Gan, and Yuhao Zhu. Crescent:
taming memory irregularities for accelerating deep point cloud analytics. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, pages 962–977, 2022.
[14] Yu Feng, Patrick Hansen, Paul N Whatmough, Guoyu Lu, and Yuhao
Zhu. Fast and accurate: Video enhancement using sparse depth. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 4492–4500, 2023.
[15] Yu Feng, Weikai Lin, Zihan Liu, Jingwen Leng, Minyi Guo, Han Zhao,
Xiaofeng Hou, Jieru Zhao, and Yuhao Zhu. Potamoi: Accelerating neural rendering via a unified streaming architecture. ACM Transactions
on Architecture and Code Optimization, 21(4):1–25, 2024.
[16] Yu Feng, Shaoshan Liu, and Yuhao Zhu. Real-time spatio-temporal
lidar point cloud compression. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pages 10766–10773. IEEE,
2020.
[17] Yu Feng, Zihan Liu, Jingwen Leng, Minyi Guo, and Yuhao Zhu. Cicero:
Addressing algorithmic and architectural bottlenecks in neural rendering by radiance warping and memory optimizations. In 2024 ACM/IEEE
51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
IEEE, 2024.
[18] Yu Feng, Boyuan Tian, Tiancheng Xu, Paul Whatmough, and Yuhao
Zhu. Mesorasi: Architecture support for point cloud analytics via

delayed-aggregation. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1037–1050. IEEE,
2020.
[19] Mingyu Gao, Jing Pu, Xuan Yang, Mark Horowitz, and Christos
Kozyrakis. Tetris: Scalable and efficient neural network acceleration with 3d memory. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, 2017.
[20] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets robotics: The kitti dataset. International Journal of Robotics
Research (IJRR), 2013.
[21] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun.
Vision meets robotics: The kitti dataset. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 32(11):1231–1237, 2013.
[22] Yulan Guo, Hanyun Wang, Qingyong Hu, Hao Liu, Li Liu, and Mohammed Bennamoun. Deep learning for 3d point clouds: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
43(12):4338–4364, 2020.
[23] Meng Han, Liang Wang, Limin Xiao, Hao Zhang, Tianhao Cai, Jiale Xu,
Yibo Wu, Chenhao Zhang, and Xiangrong Xu. Bitnn: A bit-serial accelerator for k-nearest neighbor search in point clouds. In 2024 ACM/IEEE
51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA),
pages 1278–1292. IEEE, 2024.
[24] Peter Hedman, Julien Philip, True Price, Jan-Michael Frahm, George
Drettakis, and Gabriel Brostow. Deep blending for free-viewpoint
image-based rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 37(6):1–
15, 2018.
[25] James Hegarty, John S Brunhaver, Zachary DeVito, Jonathan RaganKelley, Noy Cohen, Steven Bell, Artem Vasilyev, Mark Horowitz, and
Pat Hanrahan. Darkroom: compiling high-level image processing
code into hardware pipelines. ACM Trans. Graph., 33(4):144–1, 2014.
[26] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George
Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.
ACM Trans. Graph., 42(4):139–1, 2023.
[27] Ayaz ul Hassan Khan, Mayez Al-Mouhamed, Allam Fatayer, Anas
Almousa, Abdulrahman Baqais, and Mohammed Assayony. Padding
free bank conflict resolution for cuda-based matrix transpose algorithm. International Journal of Networked and Distributed Computing,
2(3):124–134, 2014.
[28] Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. Tanks
and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):1–13, 2017.
[29] David Koeplinger, Matthew Feldman, Raghu Prabhakar, Yaqi Zhang,
Stefan Hadjis, Ruben Fiszel, Tian Zhao, Luigi Nardi, Ardavan Pedram,
Christos Kozyrakis, et al. Spatial: A language and compiler for application accelerators. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 296–311,
2018.
[30] Yi-Hsiang Lai, Yuze Chi, Yuwei Hu, Jie Wang, Cody Hao Yu, Yuan
Zhou, Jason Cong, and Zhiru Zhang. Heterocl: A multi-paradigm
programming infrastructure for software-defined reconfigurable computing. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium
on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, pages 242–251, 2019.
[31] Junseo Lee, Seokwon Lee, Jungi Lee, Junyong Park, and Jaewoong Sim.
Gscore: Efficient radiance field rendering via architectural support for
3d gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3, pages 497–511, 2024.
[32] Jiajie Li, Yuze Chi, and Jason Cong. Heterohalide: From image processing dsl to efficient fpga acceleration. In Proceedings of the 2020
ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate
Arrays, pages 51–57, 2020.
[33] Yaoxiu Lian, Xinhao Yang, Ke Hong, Yu Wang, Ningyi Xu, and Guohao
Dai. A point transformer accelerator with distribution-aware heuristic

distance calculation. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, 2024.
[34] Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Shenlong Wang, and Raquel Urtasun. Deep
continuous fusion for multi-sensor 3d object detection. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 641–656,
2018.
[35] Yujun Lin, Zhekai Zhang, Haotian Tang, Hanrui Wang, and Song Han.
Pointacc: Efficient point cloud accelerator. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, pages 449–
461, 2021.
[36] Weiping Liu, Jia Sun, Wanyi Li, Ting Hu, and Peng Wang. Deep learning on point clouds and its application: A survey. Sensors, 19(19):4188,
2019.
[37] Dongxu Lyu, Zhenyu Li, Yuzhou Chen, Ningyi Xu, and Guanghui
He. Flna: An energy-efficient point cloud feature learning accelerator
with dataflow decoupling. In 2023 60th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2023.
[38] Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Andrew Adams, Dillon Sharlet, Jonathan RaganKelley, and Kayvon Fatahalian. Automatically scheduling halide image
processing pipelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–11,
2016.
[39] Fionn Murtagh and Pedro Contreras. Algorithms for hierarchical
clustering: an overview. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, 2(1):86–97, 2012.
[40] Reid Pinkham, Shuqing Zeng, and Zhengya Zhang. Quicknn: Memory
and performance optimization of kd tree based nearest neighbor search
for 3d point clouds. In 2020 IEEE International symposium on high
performance computer architecture (HPCA), pages 180–192. IEEE, 2020.
[41] François Pomerleau, Francis Colas, Roland Siegwart, et al. A review of
point cloud registration algorithms for mobile robotics. Foundations
and Trends® in Robotics, 4(1):1–104, 2015.
[42] Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric
space. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[43] Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain
Paris, Frédo Durand, and Saman Amarasinghe. Halide: a language
and compiler for optimizing parallelism, locality, and recomputation
in image processing pipelines. Acm Sigplan Notices, 48(6):519–530,
2013.
[44] Radu Bogdan Rusu, Zoltan Csaba Marton, Nico Blodow, Mihai Dolha,
and Michael Beetz. Towards 3d point cloud based object maps
for household environments. Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
56(11):927–941, 2008.
[45] Jonathan Dyssel Stets, Yongbin Sun, Wiley Corning, and Scott W
Greenwald. Visualization and labeling of point clouds in virtual reality.
In SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Posters, page 31. ACM, 2017.
[46] Nisarg Ujjainkar, Jingwen Leng, and Yuhao Zhu. Imagen: A general
framework for generating memory-and power-efficient image processing accelerators. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 1–13, 2023.
[47] Jian Weng, Sihao Liu, Vidushi Dadu, Zhengrong Wang, Preyas Shah,
and Tony Nowatzki. Dsagen: Synthesizing programmable spatial
accelerators. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 268–281. IEEE, 2020.
[48] Paul N Whatmough, Chuteng Zhou, Patrick Hansen, Shreyas Kolala
Venkataramanaiah, Jae-sun Seo, and Matthew Mattina. Fixynn: Efficient hardware for mobile computer vision via transfer learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.11128, 2019.
[49] Mark Whitty, Stephen Cossell, Kim Son Dang, Jose Guivant, and Jayantha Katupitiya. Autonomous navigation using a real-time 3d point
cloud. In 2010 Australasian Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pages 1–3, 2010.
[50] Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Linguang Zhang,
Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation

for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 1912–1920, 2015.
[51] Tiancheng Xu, Boyuan Tian, and Yuhao Zhu. Tigris: Architecture and
algorithms for 3d perception in point clouds. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture,
pages 629–642, 2019.
[52] Amir Yazdanbakhsh, Kambiz Samadi, Nam Sung Kim, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. Ganax: A unified mimd-simd acceleration for generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM/IEEE Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2018.
[53] Ziyu Ying, Sandeepa Bhuyan, Yan Kang, Yingtian Zhang, Mahmut T
Kandemir, and Chita R Das. Edgepc: Efficient deep learning analytics
for point clouds on edge devices. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 1–14, 2023.
[54] Ji Zhang, Sanjiv Singh, et al. Loam: Lidar odometry and mapping
in real-time. In Robotics: Science and systems, volume 2, pages 1–9.
Berkeley, CA, 2014.
[55] Jie-Fang Zhang and Zhengya Zhang. Point-x: A spatial-locality-aware
architecture for energy-efficient graph-based point-cloud deep learning. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, pages 1078–1090, 2021.
[56] Jiapei Zheng, Hao Jiang, Xinkai Nie, Zhangcheng Huang, Chixiao
Chen, and Qi Liu. Tipu: A spatial-locality-aware near-memory tile processing unit for 3d point cloud neural network. In 2023 60th ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2023.
[57] Kun Zhou, Qiming Hou, Rui Wang, and Baining Guo. Real-time kdtree construction on graphics hardware. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 27(5):1–11, 2008.

