ReSBM: Region-based Scale and Minimal-Level
Bootstrapping Management for FHE via Min-Cut
Yan Liu

Jianxin Lai*

Long Li

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Tianxiang Sui

Linjie Xiao

Peng Yuan

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Ant Group
Shenzhen, China

Ant Group
Beijing, China

Xiaojing Zhang

Qing Zhu

Wenguang Chen*

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Ant Group
Shanghai, China

Tsinghua University, Ant Group
Beijing, China

Jingling Xue
UNSW, Ant Group
Sydney, Australia

Abstract
The RNS-CKKS scheme in Fully Homomorphic Encryption
(FHE) supports crucial features for privacy-preserving machine learning, such as fixed-point arithmetic and SIMDstyle vectorization. Yet, managing the escalation of ciphertext scales from homomorphic multiplications, which risks
capacity overflow, along with bootstrapping, presents significant challenges. These complexities are exacerbated by the
need to efficiently handle scale and bootstrapping at compile
time while ensuring rapid encrypted inference.
In this paper, we present ReSBM, a novel compiler technique that simultaneously optimizes scale and bootstrapping
for encrypted inference under RNS-CKKS. By partitioning a
program’s data flow graph (DFG) into regions with a uniform
multiplicative depth of one, ReSBM ensures that placements
of Scale Management Operations (SMOs) and bootstraps affect only the latency of a region, not the scales and levels of its
live-out ciphertexts. Our region-based approach tackles the
NP-hard challenge of optimal bootstrapping placement with
hierarchical strategies: (1) optimal intra-region SMO and
bootstrapping placement using min-cut, (2) bootstrappingguided rescaling region identification across a sequence of
regions, culminating in tentative bootstrapping at two terminal regions, and (3) minimal-level bootstrap placement across
the DFG, elevating ciphertexts only to the necessary minimal
*Corresponding author.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707276

level. Validation across a variety of complex models on CPUs
shows that ReSBM not only compiles these models more
rapidly than a leading method but also boosts encrypted
inference efficiency by an average of 12.1% when compared
to another leading method. Consequently, ReSBM substantially improves the practical deployment of large models for
encrypted inference, surpassing existing methods in terms
of both compilation speed and inference performance.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Compilers; • Security and privacy → Cryptography;
Keywords: FHE, CKKS, RNS-CKKS, Machine Learning, Scale
Management, Bootstrapping
ACM Reference Format:
Yan Liu, Jianxin Lai*, Long Li, Tianxiang Sui, Linjie Xiao, Peng Yuan,
Xiaojing Zhang, Qing Zhu, Wenguang Chen*, and Jingling Xue.
2025. ReSBM: Region-based Scale and Minimal-Level Bootstrapping
Management for FHE via Min-Cut. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March
30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707276

1

Introduction

Fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) [7] facilitates computations on encrypted data, addressing privacy concerns when
outsourcing to untrusted servers and enabling secure data
exchanges in regulated sectors like healthcare and finance.
Various FHE schemes, including [8, 11, 15, 16, 20, 27, 42], have
been proposed, with the RNS-CKKS scheme [16] standing
out for encrypted inference due to its support for fixed-point
arithmetic and SIMD-style vectorization. Consequently, it
is broadly supported by FHE libraries such as HEAAN [37],
HElib [36], OpenFHE [1], SEAL [34], and ACElib [6].

