Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning
Training and Inference
Seonho Lee
seonho.lee@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
Amar Phanishayee∗
aphanishayee@meta.com
Meta
Seattle, WA, USA
Divya Mahajan
divya.mahajan@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
Abstract
Deep learning kernels exhibit a high level of predictable
memory accesses and compute patterns, making GPU’s archi-
tecture well-suited for their execution. Moreover, software
and runtime system for GPUs further enable optimizations
that aim to better utilize the stream multiprocessors, on-chip
bandwidth, multiple levels of cache hierarchy, and off-chip
high-bandwidth memory. In the context of deep learning,
the entire space of models and GPUs is constantly evolv-
ing, as newer models emerge with simultaneous upgrades
to the device. However, access to newer GPUs is often lim-
ited, raising important questions about the performance of
new model architectures on existing GPUs, existing models on
new GPUs, and new model architectures on new GPUs. To ad-
dress these questions, we introduce NeuSight, a forecasting
framework to predict the performance of a diverse range of
deep learning models, for both training and inference, on
unseen GPUs, without requiring actual execution of the tar-
get model on the target GPU. The framework leverages both
GPU hardware behavior and software library optimizations
to estimate the end-to-end performance of these models. We
observe that prior work in this area suffers from high ab-
solute error percentages when forecasting performance on
unseen models and new GPUs, as they attempt to model the
complex task of predicting the latency of a deep learning
kernel on a GPU directly using a machine learning approach.
Instead, with NeuSight, we decompose the prediction into
smaller problems, while bounding the prediction through
fundamental performance laws. NeuSight decomposes a
single deep learning kernel prediction into smaller working
sets called tiles, which are executed independently on the
∗Work done while at Microsoft Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707265
GPU. Tile-granularity predictions are determined using a
machine learning approach and aggregated to estimate the
end-to-end latency. As such, NeuSight outperforms prior
work across a variety of deep learning workloads and the
most up-to-date GPUs. It reduces the percentage error from
121.4% and 30.8% to 2.3% in predicting the latency of GPT3
model for training and inference on H100, in comparison to
state-of-the-art prior work, respectively, where GPT3 and
H100 were not used to train any framework.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Machine
learning; • Computer systems organization → Parallel
architectures.
Keywords: GPU Performance Forecasting, ML for Systems,
Deep Learning, Training and Inference
ACM Reference Format:
Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, and Divya Mahajan. 2025. Fore-
casting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and In-
ference. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operat-
ing Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rot-
terdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707265
1 Introduction
GPUs are the canonical platform to be deployed across any
Artificial Intelligence (AI) cluster. There are two main rea-
sons for their widespread adoption for deep learning: (1) the
parallel compute engines that mitigate the Von-Neumann
overheads of general purpose CPUs and (2) closely knit
software libraries that exploit the architecture for various
Deep Neural Network (DNN) kernels [32, 38]. This trend has
been further augmented by the availability of specialized
AI servers, aiming to minimize the overheads of distributed
execution [3, 40].
In this rapidly evolving field of AI, continuous iterations
are introduced. However, newer GPUs are limited in ac-
cess - either due to the long lead time (of upto 52 weeks
for H100 [12]) or their prohibitively high cost. Currently,
devising new models and the success of their execution is
contingent on the availability of underlying hardware. As
shown in Figure 1, since 2013, we have witnessed an exponen-
tial growth in model size, accompanied by a corresponding
increase in the peak performance of GPUs. In summary, the
1
arXiv:2407.13853v3
[cs.LG]
12
Dec
2024
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
Figure 1. Growth of AI models and the compute and memory
capacity of GPUs. [2, 7, 11, 22, 39, 50, 51, 54, 55]
prevailing shift towards the widespread deployment of GPU-
centric workloads raises a significant challenge: how can we
closely estimate the performance of current and upcoming
deep learning models on inaccessible GPUs?
The primary challenge in developing a solution capable
of closely estimating GPU performance using only the ab-
stract hardware architecture features lies in the fact that
the performance of deep learning models on GPUs is in-
tricately tied to low-level hardware details and software
optimizations, such as those provided by DNN kernel li-
braries such as CuDNN and Cutlass. Unlike hardware accel-
erators [9, 13, 20, 27, 28, 53], GPUs exhibit complex inter-
play between micro-architectural interactions and execution
characteristics, due L1 and L2 caches, DRAM, memory, I/O
configurations, and warp scheduling. Consequently, while
there are various established works [25, 42] that can closely
estimate the performance of DNN kernels on domain-specific
accelerators, they are not suitable for GPU performance fore-
casting. Nevertheless, previous works have aimed to leverage
cycle-accurate simulators to provide detailed execution and
performance estimates for GPUs [5, 6, 21]. However, these
simulators need to be manually updated for each change
in the GPU architecture. As such, developing a cycle accu-
rate simulator is a time-consuming process and using them
to simulate the simplest of the model can take a long time.
The most popular GPU simulator [5, 21] can take up to 18
hours to simulate ResNet-50 with a batch size of 256 [26].
ResNet-50 is relatively smaller compared to new-age com-
plex networks such as the LLMs. It will take a prohibitively
long time to use this simulator to predict the performance
of future deep learning models.
In this work, we devise a novel prediction mechanism
based on machine learning, designed with the consideration
of tile-based execution strategy on Stream Multiprocessors
(SMs) in GPUs, and the compute and memory bounds of DNN
kernels. We train our model using data collected from a set
of readily available older generation GPUs and existing deep
learning kernel information, which is then used to predict
performance of newer models, both training and inference,
on unseen GPUs.
Prior work in the domain of modeling GPU performance
takes an analytical model, a linear regression-based model,
or a neural network approach [18, 26, 62]. We empirically
observe that these solutions exhibit high percentage errors
for newer models and GPUs, for both inference and training.
They are limited for the proposed use case because they ei-
ther: (1) use a rough analytical model without information
about detailed GPU execution (hardware or software) (2) re-
quire execution on a specific GPU to extrapolate latency for
newer GPUs [18, 26], or (3) are unable to capture the neces-
sary architectural information of the GPUs [62]. Additionally,
prior work exhibits high percentage errors for newer models
and unseen GPUs because they directly model the overall
kernel latency using machine learning. However, GPU ex-
ecution, even of a single kernel, is a complex conflation of
hardware execution across SMs and software optimizations,
which often cannot be captured by a machine learning model
trying to determine the latency of the kernel only using cer-
tain high-level features such as effective memory bandwidth,
compute utilization, and peak flop.
Thus, we develop NeuSight which digresses from prior
work as it leverages the insight that popular GPU libraries de-
compose deep learning kernels into multiple smaller working
sets. These small working sets, or tiles, are then dispatched
and executed on the GPU independently across the SMs.
Based on this observation we partition the end-to-end latency
prediction into regular and more manageable sub-problems,
predicting the latency at tile-granularity. However, note that
the GPU execution is governed by a few performance laws
- such as the performance cannot exceed the peak flops or
peak memory bandwidth. We capture the above two aspects in
our prediction and only use a machine learning model to deter-
mine the utilization of the device based on the DNN kernel and
GPU properties. The output of the MLP, i.e., utilization of the
device, is subsequently used to predict the tile, operator, and
the model level latency. Overall, the goal of this entire frame-
work is to distill down to the properties of GPU execution,
use machine learning to capture the runtime non-linear be-
havior, bound the results by fundamental performance laws,
and gather the predictions for end-to-end latency predictions.
This approach ensures robustness in unseen scenarios, such
as new GPUs and models. To ensure prediction for large
models that require multiple GPUs, we extend our approach
to predict the latency of distributed execution within a server.
To do so, we predict the latency of communication operators
and integrate these with the per-device execution latencies
determined by NeuSight to calculate the overall distributed
performance.
The evaluation on a diverse set of GPUs (Nvidia H100,
A100-80GB, V100, A100-40GB, P100, T4, L4) and deep learn-
ing workloads (BERT, GPT2, GPT3, OPT, Switch Trans-
former) shows that NeuSight demonstrates a percentage
2
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
error of 8.9%, compared to 140% by MLP-based [62] and 60.8%
by linear regression-based [26] prior work, without being
trained on H100, L4, and A100-80GB GPUs and trained only
on a subset of GPT3 and OPT model dimensions. When eval-
uated for distributed training on a 4-GPU server, H100 (DGX
Box) and A100 (NVLink), NeuSight shows a modest percent-
age error of 5.4% across GPT2 and GPT3 model. The error
presented throughout this paper is the mean absolute per-
centage error, calculated against actual measured latencies.
For brevity, we henceforth refer to it as percentage error.
2 Background
2.1 GPU Architecture
The availability of parallelism in deep learning workloads
and their suitability to GPU-architectures has led to co-
optimization across various generations of workloads and
GPUs. While the terminology used in this paper is of NVIDIA
GPUs, we showcase the applicability of NeuSight to both
Nvidia and AMD GPUs. A GPU is comprised of a collection
of identical building blocks known as Streaming Multiproces-
sors (SMs). These SMs are connected to a L2 cache through
an on-chip interconnection network. The L2 cache, in turn,
is connected to memory through off-chip I/O. Each SM fea-
tures multiple processing units and a small L1 cache. The
regularity of the GPU architecture makes it scalable to tens
of thousands of processing units, allowing it to effectively
exploit parallelism in deep learning kernels.
2.2 Deep Learning Execution
Kernel execution. Modern deep learning workloads consist
of multiple layers, where each layer itself has multiple fine-
grained kernels such as matrix multiplication or element-
wise operators. In the context of this paper, DNN kernel is a
tensor operator such as CONV, GEMM, Add, Softmax, that is
executed entirely on the device once initiated. Although the
entire workload comprises thousands of kernels, due to the
repetitive structure of the model, they can be decomposed
into a few types of operators. These types are General Matrix
Multiplication (GEMM), fully-connected layer, and point wise
operators (ReLU, Tanh, Softmax, etc.). Hence, this work focuses
on determining the execution of each kernel type on GPU to
predict the latency as detailed in Section 4.1.
Per-device execution. Machine learning practitioners use
frameworks such as PyTorch and TensorFlow [14, 48] to rep-
resent and deploy a model as a set of layers. The dataflow
of the kernels is managed by the framework and dispatched
to the GPU. The corresponding device library then executes
each kernel and returns the results to the framework. For
example, NVIDIA GPUs utilize the CuDNN library for kernel
execution, abstracting the underlying hardware complexity
from the user. In this paper, similar to prior work, we as-
sume kernels execute sequentially on the device, which is also
empirically validated for the mainstream machine learning
(a) Multi-Layer Perceptron Approach (Habitat) [62]
(b) Linear Regression-based Approach (Li et al.) [26]
Figure 2. Prediction error of prior work on BMM operator,
reported in percentage error. Out of distribution dimensions
and GPUs are highlighted. For these results, we trained Habi-
tat and Li et al. models only up to V100, excluding any A100s,
H100, and L4.
frameworks [63]. Thus, the predicted latency of each kernel is
aggregated based on the dataflow of the model that executes
on each device to determine the per-GPU execution latency.
Distributed per-server execution. Due to the size of the
model, training or inference is often executed in a distributed
fashion. Pipeline parallel and tensor model parallel are used
to split a model across various devices, whereas data parallel
is used to improve throughput [17, 23, 29, 55]. Regardless,
distributed execution warrants communication across de-
vices such as send/receive for pipeline parallel and collective
operations like all-reduce for tensor model parallel and data
parallel. In this work, NeuSight supports prediction of la-
tency when a model is distributed across GPUs within a
single server. Within this server, GPUs can be connected
through NVLink or like a DGX box to support the afore-
mentioned parallelization techniques [40, 41]. The type of
parallelism, its width, and the schedule is provided by the
user as an input to NeuSight.
3 Motivation
There is a growing need to predict GPU performance for
both existing and upcoming models for a variety of reasons:
(a) comparing performance across various devices, (b) utiliz-
ing estimates to identify GPUs that meet the performance
requirements, and (c) evaluating the feasibility of deploying
new model architectures on either existing or new GPUs.
We empirically validate prior work aimed at predicting the
3
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
performance of GPUs by employing data-driven methods
and observe that do not generalize well to new GPUs or
new models. These drive the insights for our framework,
NeuSight.
In this section, for motivation, we focus on a single kernel
type Batched Matrix Multiplication (BMM), commonly found
in DNNs. We present end-to-end comparisons (training and
inference) in Section 6. We observe that even predicting
performance of a single kernel on a GPU requires a careful
consideration of hardware architecture and software opti-
mization. This insight is based on empirical validation of
prior work employing machine learning to predict operator
latency.
3.1 Predicting Performance of Batched Matrix
Multiplication Using prior work
We cover two most closely related prior works, Habitat [62]
and a linear regression based approach [26] to estimate the
latency of GPUs for deep learning.
Habitat classifies operators into two types: kernel-alike
which use similar kernels across different GPU architectures,
and kernel-varying which use different kernels across dif-
ferent GPU architectures. For kernel-alike operators (such
as vector operators), it executes applications on an existing
GPU to measure latency and scales the latency with the ratio
of target GPU hardware configuration to that of existing
GPU. As such, Habitat requires a GPU in-hand to estimate
the latency of these operators. For kernel-varying operators
(such as BMM), they train multiple Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) models to predict the latency of different operators.
The MLP trains on the following GPU features: memory
size, memory bandwidth, number of SM cores, Peak FLOPS,
and kernel input and output dimensions as input, and the
measured latency as the output.
Li et al.[26] proposes a linear regression model to predict
performance based on FLOPs count of target kernel. For
each GPU, they collect multiple data points to construct a
linear regression between latency and the number of FLOPs
(determined based on the size of input/output matrices). They
observe that achieved performance across different GPUs
is usually linearly proportional to their memory bandwidth.
Thus, they construct a linear regression between the memory
bandwidth of GPUs and achieved FLOPS performance, using
this relationship to infer the performance of GPUs outside
the training set.
Figure 2 reports the prediction errors for these two works.
For Habitat, we utilize the vanilla MLP model provided by the
authors. This model was trained on diverse GPUs predating
2018, including V100, 2080Ti, T4, RTX2070, P100, and P4000,
with matrix dimensions of up to 1024 and a batch size less
than 128. We aim to understand the applicability of this
work on newer GPUs and larger dimensions common in
newer models. As Figure 2a shows, Habitat faces challenges
in generalizing to matrix multiplications with dimensions
Table 1. Various ML models on predicting latency of BMM.
Prediction errors are reported in percentage error.
Predictor Number In-distribution Out-of-distribution
Architecture of layers Prediction Error (%) Prediction Error (%)
MLP 8 28.0 70.9
16 22.3 81.4
Transformer 3 22.3 126.1
6 21.0 86.4
larger than 1024, resulting in a percentage error of up to 38%.
Additionally, Habitat struggles with unseen GPUs, displaying
a percentage error of up to 127% on A100.
For Li et al., we gather BMM data on P4, T4, P100, and V100.
We use linear regression to correlate the kernel’s FLOP count
with latency, following the paper’s outlined procedures. For
GPUs outside the training set (A100, L4, and H100), we use
this linear regression to predict the latency. As Figure 2b
shows, the linear regression assumption fails on matrix mul-
tiplications with smaller dimensions due to under-utilization
of the GPU, when the latency does not scale linearly. This
work also faces challenges in generalizing to unseen GPUs
because of its simplistic extrapolation method, i.e., using
a linear ratio of memory bandwidth to infer the effective
performance of unseen GPUs.
3.2 Predicting Performance of Batched Matrix
Multiplication with Larger Predictors
One potential solution to reduce the prediction error is to
use larger models for the same problem, i.e., predicting the
latency of an operator using a machine learning model with
more layers and features. We extend the study to use a larger
and more complex model with an increased number of layers
to capture a broader set of execution patterns. To test the
limitations of relying purely on large machine learning mod-
els, we add more layers to Habitat’s MLP or alternatively
use a transformer architecture from prior work, Prime [24].
We train these models using the same method specified in
Section 6.1. BMM operations with dimensions between 1 and
4096 are used as the test set. Table 1 summarizes the predic-
tion error averaged across in-distribution BMM operations
(matrix dimensions less than 1024) and out-of-distribution
BMM operations (some dimensions larger than 1024). De-
spite improved performance with larger models, all the eval-
uated models still show high percentage error exceeding 70%
for out-of-distribution cases.
It is evident from the results that naively using machine
learning techniques to predict kernel latency does not suffice,
as they fail to capture the continuous performance improve-
ments of GPUs resulting from both software and hardware
optimizations. This drives the key insight for NeuSight: un-
like prior work, it does not directly predict the latency of
kernels using machine learning; instead, it distills the kernel
execution into tiles, uses a machine learning model to predict
the utilization of the device per tile, and then determines
4
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
the latency based on performance bounds defined by GPU
architecture. NeuSight only relies on architectural details
readily available for any new or upcoming GPU.
3.3 Other Related Works
Performance modeling using analytical frameworks.
Several works [15, 16, 18, 49] propose analytical models to
predict GPU performance. Paleo [49], Calculon [18], and
MAD-Max [16] decompose latency into computation and
communication for distributed training. They estimate la-
tency by measuring effective peak throughput with represen-
tative workloads on the target GPU, which requires access
to the target GPU for estimation. The primary goal of these
works is to estimate performance for distributed execution
and employ simpler analytical tools for per-device perfor-
mance estimation. In contrast, NeuSight focuses on provid-
ing a higher-fidelity estimation tool for per-device perfor-
mance prediction. Nevertheless, NeuSight can be integrated
with networking simulators to estimate for distributed set-
tings.
Cycle accurate simulators. Cycle accurate simulators [6]
require detailed modeling of each GPU component. For every
new GPU, the simulator must be updated to support new
architectural features, which might not be readily available
at launch. Proprietary architectural features can create a
gap between real hardware and simulators. Additionally,
cycle accurate simulators are not suitable for end-to-end
ML application execution due to their long simulation times.
While certain works, such as sampled principal kernels [5],
reduce simulation time, they still take at least hours to days
to simulate modern DNN due to the need for modeling every
detail of the hardware.
Machine Learning based approaches. Due to the large
number of compute lanes in GPUs, they often observe lin-
ear performance trends for compute intensive kernels, and
hence many prior work leverage regression models to pre-
dict the performance of a GPU architecture [19, 26, 60]. Some
works require extracting low-level hardware features, such
as hardware counter values, to make predictions. However,
these values are unavailable unless the device is accessi-
ble [43, 44, 58]. Such approaches cannot capture the complex
intricacies of hardware features and software optimizations
such as tiling for deep learning and do not support cross-
generational performance prediction with GPUs due to the
lack of hardware. Other works [61] propose graph neural
networks to predict resource consumption (GPU utilization,
memory utilization, and network TX/RX throughput) in dis-
tributed deep learning. However, this approach necessitates
target GPUs for transfer training.
CPU executions to predict speed-up on GPU. XAPP [4]
executes the CPU code of a target algorithm to predict GPU
speed-up. However, this approach assumes the GPU will
execute the same algorithm but with higher parallelizability.
(a) Tiling of output matrix.
(b) Mapping tiles to multiple SMs.
Figure 3. Dataflow of a GEMM on a GPU. We assume multi-
plication between two 4x4 matrices and tile size of 2x2.
In contrast, modern software optimizations for deep learning
kernels are designed specifically for GPUs [8, 10], diverging
from CPU implementations.
4 NeuSight Forecasting
NeuSight forecasts the latency of executing a model on
multiple GPUs in a server in three steps. The first and main
step forecasts the latency of a single kernel that executes
on the GPU atomically. The kernel leverages software and
hardware optimizations for GPUs, namely tiling, parallel
execution across SMs, on-chip caching, and HBM bandwidth.
NeuSight uses architectural details such as memory size,
memory bandwidth, number of SMs, L2 cache size, and peak
FLOPS to predict the kernel’s latency through a machine
learning approach. Our kernel estimation is inspired by how
deep learning kernels are disassembled into multiple smaller
tiles and mapped onto GPU hardware for execution. This
approach differs from prior work, which relies solely on com-
pute or memory utilization to predict latency. Section 4.1
showcases the execution of a few representative DNN ker-
nels on the GPU. NeuSight supports tensor operators such
as General Matrix Multiplication (GEMM), element-wise op-
erators such as addition and ReLU, and reduction-based oper-
ators such as Softmax and layer normalization. In the second
step, the per-operator latency is aggregated to predict the
performance of the DNN workload based on its dataflow
graph. In the third step, detailed in Section 5.1, the perfor-
mance of per-GPU execution is combined with predicted
network latencies to determine the performance of a DNN
executing across multiple GPUs in a server.
4.1 Kernel Execution on GPUs
Tiled execution. In this section, we focus on GEMM, a com-
monly found kernel in DNNs, but NeuSight can predict
5
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
Figure 4. Each tile is distributed evenly across SMs and
executed concurrently, in multiple number of waves. [33]
the latency of various operators to determine the end-to-
end performance. GEMM is a core building-block for many
deep learning layers, such as fully-connected, convolution,
recurrent neural network, or self-attention found in modern
large language models. Figure 3 shows a simplified view of a
typical dataflow of GEMM on a GPU. Modern GPU libraries
execute GEMM by first partitioning the output matrix into
multiple identical tiles (Figure 3a). Each tile corresponds to
a segment of the output matrix, loads the necessary input
operands from input matrices, and computes the output ele-
ments. These tiles are mapped to each SM of the GPU and
executed concurrently (Figure 3b). Typically the number of
tiles which can be executed concurrently is limited by the
number of SMs on the GPU, and the entire GPU kernel is
executed in multiple waves of tile groups as depicted in Fig-
ure 4. Tiling strategy enables scalable execution of GEMM,
by decomposing GEMM into multiple smaller workloads,
which executes the identical computation on different input
and output elements.
Fundamental performance laws of GPUs. Runtime of
each kernel is bounded by a few features of a GPU, such
as peak memory bandwidth or peak FLOPs. Roofline analy-
sis [59] provides a straightforward method to estimate the
approximate performance of a GPU kernel, taking into ac-
count the arithmetic intensity of the kernel. The intensity
is computed by dividing number of flops (𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑠𝑘) by size of
memory transactions (𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑘). The roofline bandwidth can
be computed as follows:
𝐾 =
𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑠𝑘
𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑘
; 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝐵𝑊 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐾 × 𝑚𝑒𝑚𝐵𝑊𝑝, 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑠𝑝 ) (1)
Where 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑠𝑝 is the peak FLOPs and 𝑚𝑒𝑚𝐵𝑊𝑝 is the peak
memory bandwidth of GPU. Roofline bandwidth represents
the maximum achievable throughput of a kernel on a GPU.
Latency hiding in GPU. Although the roofline bandwidth
represents the theoretical maximum bandwidth, each kernel
does not always fully utilize the available compute or mem-
ory bandwidth. Table 2 shows the hardware utilization of
H100 when executing matrix multiplication, with a sequence
length of 512 and a hidden dimension of 64, seen in BERT.
Figure 5. Performance of (256 × 256) × (256 × 256) matrix
multiplication with varying waves on V100; sweeping the
number of waves by changing the batch size from 1 to 300.
Table 2. Measured compute utilization of H100 GPU when
executing (512x64) x (64x512) matrix multiplication across
various batch sizes.
Batch Size 32 64 128 256 512
Peak FLOPS Utilization 53.2% 70.7% 69.4% 72.3% 86.0%
The table shows that it is still common in machine learning
models to not fully utilize compute or memory bandwidth.
Another performance bound in GPU execution is the use
of numerous threads to harness parallelism, achieving sig-
nificantly higher throughput compared to traditional CPU
architectures. GPUs can achieve the aforementioned peak
hardware performance (𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝐵𝑊 ) only when there are
enough available software threads to effectively mitigate
latency arising from data dependency or memory stalls by
scheduling independent threads. Consequently, GPU perfor-
mance relies heavily on the level of parallelism in the kernels,
which is directly proportional to the number of threads that
can be independently scheduled in each SM. Figure 5 illus-
trates the correlation between the number of waves available
in each SM and the achievable throughput. As the number
of waves increases, each SM is assigned more waves, result-
ing in a greater number of threads per SM. This allows for
effective hiding of stall latency in each thread, thus leading
to higher performance.
4.2 Kernel-wise Prediction
In predicting the latency of each kernel, we leverage the
execution insights discussed above: tiled execution and fun-
damental GPU performance laws.
Tile-granularity prediction. For each DNN kernel we
break it down into multiple identical tiles, instead of directly
predicting the latency of the kernel. This insight is motivated
from prior work [62], where a machine learning model is
unable to capture the necessary hardware level and soft-
ware optimizations on out of distribution dimensions and
GPUs. This implies that there are more intricate execution
patterns although consistent across the GPUs, but are not
easily captured by machine learning models. Thus, we use
6
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
the machine learning model to make a prediction per tile, and
assemble these predictions to determine the latency of the
whole operator. This decomposition simplifies the problem
into more manageable sub-problems, allowing the machine
learning model to be trained on smaller and more straight-
forward tasks. For example, the typical tile dimensions used
by GEMM library ranges from 32 to 256, which is still much
smaller than the dimensions of GEMMs in modern DNN
workloads. To compute the latency of the entire kernel from
the predictions for each tile, we employ the following:
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑠 = Π𝑁
𝑖=1 ⌈
𝑥𝑖
𝑡𝑖
⌉ (2)
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 = ⌈
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑠
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑠𝑚
⌉ (3)
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑂𝑝𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 = 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 × 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 (4)
Variables 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑡𝑖 are the dimensions of the output and
the tile, respectively, 𝑁 is the number of dimensions of the
output, and 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑠𝑚 is the number of SMs available in GPU.
The tile dimensions are determined by metadata obtained
with PyTorch Profiler discussed in Section 6.1. In Equation 4,
we assume that each SM executes one tile at a time. The la-
tency of the kernel typically scales linearly with the number
of waves of tiles, and can be modeled as sequential execution
of waves of tiles [36]. As GPUs can execute threads from
multiple tiles concurrently, this overlap is accounted for and
abstracted in Equation 7, which will be discussed in the fol-
lowing subsection. In the next subsection, we discuss how
we can obtain the 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦.
Imposing performance laws to tile prediction.
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 relies on the compute utilization of the SM
and the achieved bandwidth of the kernel (𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑊 ), and
is physically bounded by 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑏𝑤. This relationship is
captured by the following equations:
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 =
𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑊
(5)
𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑊 = 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑓 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝐵𝑊 × 𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (6)
Next we need to predict GPU’s utilization. We use the
observation that a GPU approaches the maximum achiev-
able throughput as the number of available threads in the
workload increases (as shown in Figure 5). We formulate the
correlation between number of waves and utilization as a
machine learning model. This is because, an ML model can
capture the non-linear behavior between kernel latency and
GPU characteristics and kernel properties such as operator
type, tile dimensions, and arithmetic intensity. We task MLPs
with predicting the coefficients of the following equation:
𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 −
𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠
(7)
𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎,𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎 = 𝜎 (𝑀𝐿𝑃 (𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑓 𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠)) (8)
This equation models utilization, which increases as the
number of waves increases due to the negative beta factor
but is capped by alpha. We apply a sigmoid function to the
outputs of MLPs to bound the predicted utilization value
to below 1. This approach constrains the predictions to ad-
here to fundamental performance laws, enhancing its overall
predictive capabilities even when faced with unseen inputs.
4.3 Machine Learning Model to Predict Utilization
We use an MLP with multiple fully-connected layers as
our predictor. We train five distinct MLPs, each tailored
for batched matrix multiplication, fully-connected layers,
element-wise operators, softmax, and layer normalization.
Model architecture. Each MLP comprises 8 hidden lay-
ers, each with 512 hidden units, similar to prior work
[62]. First-layer converts the input feature vectors into 512-
dimensional hidden vector, and the last layer converts the
512-dimensional hidden vector to single-dimensional output.
ReLU is used as the activation function and applied at the
end of every layer. This simple and small model architecture
allows for fast but still accurate predictions, especially when
combined with the GPU execution flow and performance
scaling laws in the NeuSight framework.
We use memory size and bandwidth, peak FLOPS, and L2
cache size as GPU features for this modeling. We use these
features because: (1) they are publicly available even for
newer GPUs, (2) bandwidth and peak FLOPs determine the
performance bounds of I/O bound and compute bound oper-
ators, and (3) on-chip memory size (L2 cache) and off-chip
memory size (such as High Bandwidth Memory or DRAM)
determine which underlying implementation will be used
by the libraries such as cuDNN and CUTLASS to execute
the DNN operators. For instance, information for the H100
was made available through NVIDIA’s public documentation
after its launch [35]. For the Blackwell architecture, the latest
NVIDIA GPU architecture announced [37], details on mem-
ory size, bandwidth, and peak FLOPs are already available.
Information on the number of SMs and L2 cache size is un-
available, but based on prior years, should become available
closer to the release date or shortly after the GPU is released.
Instead of directly feeding these input features to the MLP,
we pre-process them through the following steps. First, as
we are making predictions on a tile granularity, with each
tile mapped to a single SM, we divide the device resources by
the number of SMs to determine per-SM resources (e.g., per-
SM peak FLOPS). Second, since the MLP predicts achievable
throughput, we feed it with the utilization of each hardware
resource. The five features shown in Table 3 are fed to the
MLP as an input.
Predictors for various types of kernels. NeuSight in-
cludes multiple specialized predictors to support various
types of DNN kernels. There are five MLPs to predict the
utilization for BMM, fully-connected layers, element-wise
operators, softmax, and layer normalization. For unseen oper-
ators, we consider them memory-bound and estimate latency
by dividing the memory requirement by memory bandwidth.
7
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
Deep Learning Model
PyTorch or TensorFlow
Target GPU Features
L2 Cache Size,
Peak FLOPs,
Memory Bandwidth,
Memory Size
Graph
Extractor
Per-GPU Kernel
Graph
Tensor
Dimensions &
Operator Type Tile Latency
Predictor
(MLP)
Per-GPU Kernel
Graph
Predicted Latency
per Kernel Scheduler &
Latency
Aggregator
End-to-End
DNN latency
NeuSight
Tile Database
Tile-sizes
obtained from
training dataset
Per-Tile
Latency Per Operator
Latency
Predictor
Distribution Strategy
dp, pp, tmp
Network
Latency
Predictor
Distributed Graph
Network Operators and
Types, Tensor Dimensions
Distributed Graph
Predicted Latency
per Network
Operator
Figure 6. Overall workflow of NeuSight. The Tile Latency Predictor uses an MLP to determine the utilization and predicts
the kernel latency. This prediction is aggregated for per-device and distributed execution latency forecasting.
Table 3. List of input features for predicting the utilization.
Input Features Unit
𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑠𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑘𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑀
𝐺𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆
𝑇 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆/𝑠
𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝐵𝑊 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑀
𝑀𝐵
𝐺𝐵/𝑠
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 × 𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝐿2𝐶𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑀
𝑀𝐵
𝐾𝐵
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 × 𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑀
𝑀𝐵
𝑀𝐵
𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑠𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒 / 𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑒
𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑘𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆 / 𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦𝐵𝑊
𝐺𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆 / 𝑀𝐵
(𝑇 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑃𝑆/𝑠) / (𝐺𝐵/𝑠)
These diverse predictors enable NeuSight to handle various
model architectures.
4.4 Support for Operator Fusion
Modern ML frameworks [8, 48] accelerate the execution of
memory-bound kernels by fusing multiple consecutive op-
erators and eliminating the data movement from external
memory. NeuSight supports the prediction of the fused op-
erators. When multiple consecutive vector kernels are fused,
NeuSight accumulates the FLOPs count of each operator,
but discards the memory size required for the intermediate
results between kernels. NeuSight uses the updated FLOPs
count, memory size of the fused operator, and the metadata
including tile size of the first operator to be fused to make pre-
dictions with its MLP. For instance, in the GPT-2 architecture,
the element-wise addition used for residual connections in
each layer can be fused with subsequent layer normalization.
NeuSight can predict the latency of this fused operator accu-
mulating the FLOPs count of both operators and discarding
the memory size required for the output of the element-wise
addition and the input of the layer normalization, and using
the predictor for element-wise addition. Another common
form of operator fusion is combining the GEMM operator
with activation functions. NeuSight supports this fusion
using the BMM or fully-connected layer predictor and ad-
justing the input compute count and memory size.
5 NeuSight Workflow
NeuSight forecasts the end-to-end latency of a deep learn-
ing model executing on a single GPU or a multi-GPU server
in three steps: (1) forecasting the performance of per-kernel
execution on the GPU as detailed above, (2) combining these
kernel-level estimates based on the dataflow graph of the
DNN to determine the per-GPU latency, and (3) estimating
collectives and network operations and integrating them
with the per-device execution latency to determine the per-
formance on a GPU server executing distributed training or
inference. Both training and inference graphs are supported.
Figure 6 shows the overall workflow of NeuSight. It takes
the description of the target deep learning model in PyTorch
and extracts the operator/kernel graph using the Torch.fx
library [46]. It records the metadata of each kernel, including
operator type and input/output tensor dimensions. Based on
the metadata and tile size, each operator is annotated with
predictions made by our kernel-level predictor. The per-GPU
latency is computed by accumulating the predicted latency of
each kernel executing on a single device, which aligns with
device execution where kernels are executed sequentially on
the GPU [63].
NeuSight also takes as input the distribution strategy,
data parallel width, pipeline parallel depth and schedule, or
tensor model parallel width. It is important to highlight that
the focus of NeuSight is to effectively predict the performance
of DNNs on new or unseen GPUs. Predicting the performance
of each kernel is the complex and unsolved aspect tackled
by NeuSight, as it involves addressing the non-linearity of
GPU software optimizations and hardware execution. For
completeness, we provide a solution that can forecast the
latency of distributed execution on a multi-GPU server. The
goal of this forecasting is to enable researchers to determine
latency of a relatively larger model that often cannot fit
on a single device due to memory constraints. This allows
NeuSight to provide accurate and reliable predictions for
the performance of the compute/memory intensity of the
DNN while avoiding the variability introduced by complex
multi-server network operations. "Prior work [52, 57] already
8
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
models complex network topologies, which researchers can
leverage alongside NeuSight."
5.1 Forecasting for Distributed Execution
NeuSight supports a single multi-GPU server execution
similar to the ones connected through NVLink or DGX Box
configurations. For each form of parallelism, NeuSight adds
the corresponding network operators to the DNN graph.
Pipeline parallelism involves sending and receiving activa-
tions between GPUs in subsequent pipeline stages, while
data parallelism and tensor model parallelism perform allre-
duce operations on gradients and activations, respectively.
Estimating performance of network operators.
NeuSight estimates the latency of ring-based allreduce
and peer-to-peer send/receive based on the bandwidth of
the network link. We measure the link bandwidth of an
existing system and calculate its network link utilization.
Using this data, along with the peak link bandwidth of the
target system, we estimate the latency of the collective
operators on the target system. The estimated latency of
network operators is combined with the predicted latency
of per-GPU DNN graph to predict the end-to-end latency
of distributed execution. NeuSight uses the following
methods for each parallelization strategy.
Pipeline parallel. Pipeline parallel requires forward and
backward pass micro-batches to be interleaved to achieve
high utilization as per the schedules proposed by prior
work [17, 29, 30]. For NeuSight, the user provides the
pipeline parallel schedule and the framework stitches the exe-
cution across various devices to determine the overall latency
of the model executing on a server. Currently, NeuSight in-
serts the necessary pipeline bubbles between the forward
and backward pass based on GPipe [17] schedule, however
can be easily extended to other schedules. NeuSight esti-
mates the latency of these pipeline bubbles based on the size
of the microbatch, the number of GPUs, and the latency of
send-receive operations.
Tensor model- and Data- parallel. NeuSight inserts all-
reduce operators into the DNN graph to synchronize the
activations (in tensor model parallel) or gradients (in data
parallel) across GPUs. The framework currently supports
Megatron tensor model strategy [55]. The latency of ring-
based all-reduce is estimated and aggregated with the com-
pute latency of kernels to determine the end-to-end latency.
6 Evaluation
6.1 Implementation Details
Hardware. Table 4 shows the GPUs used to evaluate
NeuSight. We use 5 Nvidia GPUs and 2 AMD GPUs released
from 2016 to 2021 for training our MLP predictor. AMD GPUs
have a dedicated datapath for FP32 matrix multiplication,
and peak FLOPS for matrix multiplication as shown[1]. Addi-
tionally, we use 2 Nvidia GPUs released in 2022 and 2023 as
Table 4. List of GPUs used to train and test the frameworks.
GPUs reserved for the test set are highlighted in grey.
Vendor GPU Year Peak FLOPS Memory Memory # L2 Cache
(TFLOPS) Size (GB) BW (GB/s) SMs (MB)
NVIDIA P4 2016 5.4 8 192 40 2
P100 2016 9.5 16 732 56 4
V100 2017 8.1 32 900 80 6
T4 2018 14.1 16 320 40 4
A100-40GB 2020 19.5 40 1555 108 40
A100-80GB 2020 19.5 80 1935 108 40
L4 2023 31.3 24 300 60 48
H100 2022 66.9 80 3430 132 50
AMD MI100 2020 23.1, 46.1(Matrix) 32 1230 120 8
MI210 2021 22.6, 45.3(Matrix) 64 1640 104 16
MI250 (per die) 2021 22.6, 45.3(Matrix) 64 1640 104 16
Table 5. Workloads evaluated. Table details model complex-
ity through parameter size and architecture configurations.
Model Year Parameter # of # Attention Hidden Sequence
Size Layers Heads Dimensions Length
BERT Large 2018 340M 12 16 760 512
GPT2 Large 2019 774M 36 20 1280 1024
GPT3 XL 2020 1.3B 24 24 3072 2048
OPT 1.3B 2022 1.3B 24 24 2048 2048
GPT3 2.7B 2020 2.7B 32 32 2560 2048
SwitchTrans 2021 5.3B 24 32 1024 512
out-of-distribution GPUs. For all the final results, A100-40GB
variant was used for training but the A100-80GB variant with
larger memory and higher memory bandwidth was used as
the testset.
Generating the training dataset. We use the 5 training
set GPUs shown in Table 4 to collect data to train our MLPs.
Latency is measured by running each operator 25 times and
averaging the results. Input tensors are initialized using a
normal distribution. All measurements were conducted in
fp32 format, using PyTorch 2.1.0 compiled with CUDA Li-
brary 12.1 for NVIDIA GPUs, and PyTorch 2.4.1 compiled
with ROCm 6.1 for AMD GPUs. The collected data covers
the following operators:
• Batched Matrix Multiplication - 87,627 data
points Batch size and dimensions from 1 to 1024.
• Fully-connected Layer - 32,256 data points. Batch
size from 1 to 8192, input and output sizes from 1 to
65,536.
• Element-wise operators - 26,066 data points. Batch
size from 512 to 16,384, vector size from 512 to 4096
for addition, division, multiplication, GELU, ReLU, and
Tanh.
• Softmax - 1,807 data points. Batch size from 4096
to 16,384, vector size from 512 to 4096.
• Layer normalization - 1,501 data points. Batch size
from 4096 to 16,384, vector size from 512 to 4096.
We reserve 20% of this sample dataset for validation. For
other operators, such as the embedding layer, which do not
9
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
contribute significantly to the end-to-end latency (e.g. less
than 0.1% for BERT Large), we assume that they are memory-
bound operators and estimate latency by dividing the work-
ing memory size by the memory bandwidth of the GPU.
Baselines. We compare NeuSight with three baselines: (1)
the roofline analysis, most widely used analytical perfor-
mance estimation method, (2) Habitat [62], a recent work
that uses an MLP to predict GPU performance, and (3) Li
et al. [26], the linear regression based method to predict
the latency of deep learning models. For fair comparisons,
we train the baselines with the up-to-date training dataset
as NeuSight. For Habitat, we train the MLP following the
methodology presented in their paper, but with the larger
MLP for higher accuracy (Section 3.2). For element-wise op-
erators, Habitat requires a reference latency of the operator
on an existing GPU. We measure the latency of element-wise
operators on V100 and use the methodology presented in the
paper to predict the latency for other GPUs. For V100, we
use the latency measured on P100. For Li et al., following the
method described in the paper, we apply linear regression
between GPU memory bandwidth and achieved FLOPS per-
formance. We then infer the achieved FLOPS performance
of the unseen GPU using its memory bandwidth.
Training the NeuSight predictor. We train the MLPs
using the AdamW optimizer with L2 regularization for 100
epochs, with batch sizes of ranging from 16 to 128. For Habi-
tat predictors, the learning rate is set to 5𝑒−5 for highest
accuracy. For NeuSight, we use a range of learning rates
from 1𝑒−6 to 5𝑒−3, tailored to different predictors within the
model. We use mean absolute percentage error for Habi-
tat and symmetric mean absolute percentage error [56] for
NeuSight as the loss functions.
Tile size. We utilize the PyTorch Profiler [45] to obtain the
kernel names and the number of thread blocks. For matrix
multiplications, we deduce tile sizes from the metadata ap-
pended to the kernel names. For other kernels, we use the
number of thread blocks to infer tile sizes. We record the
kernel name, input dimensions, GPU features, and tile sizes
in a database during training. For prediction, we estimate
tile sizes by finding the closest match in the database based
on the kernel name, input dimensions, and GPU features.
DNN workloads evaluated. Table 5 shows the 6 commonly
used models released between 2018 and 2022. For the Switch
Transformer, which is a mixture of experts model, a 4-expert
configuration is employed. For each of these models, we
measure the inference latency for a binary classification task
using BERT, and for a text generation task using GPT-2, GPT-
3, OPT, and Switch Transformer. We use the time to generate
the first token as the latency metric for text generation tasks.
We also report and compare the per-iteration training time,
including a single forward and backward pass. Predictions
for each model are then compared with the measured laten-
cies to evaluate our framework. Due to the high memory
requirement of training, we measure training latency on
GPUs with at least 24 GB of HBM.
6.2 Single-Device Execution Results
End-to-end mean percentage error. Figure 7 shows
the inference and training latency prediction error of
NeuSight and the baselines on 6 deep learning models with
varying batch sizes executed on 8 GPUs in percentage error.
Instances that include out-of-distribution GPUs or models
are highlighted. For example, H100 is an out-of-distribution
GPU as is not included in the training set. Similarly, GPT3-
2.7B is an out-of-distribution model as it includes BMM with
one of the operand dimensions equal to 2048, which is larger
than the 1024 used in the training set.
Across all GPUs and models, NeuSight shows a modest
average percentage error compared to all other baselines.
Specifically, the roofline analysis shows an average error
of 31.2% and 31.9%, Habitat shows 220.9% and 725.8%, and
Li et al. shows 61.2% and 58.3%, for inference and training,
respectively. In contrast, NeuSight shows a percentage error
of only 9.7% for inference and 7.3% for training workloads.
Smaller models relative to GPU capacity, like BERT on H100,
tend to show higher error rates due to library overheads.
Nonetheless, NeuSight’s kernel tiling approach still achieves
reasonable accuracy.
The strengths of NeuSight are highlighted on out-of-
distribution GPUs, where it achieves an average latency pre-
diction error of 8.1% and a maximum error of 28.2%. In com-
parison, Habitat and Li et al. show average errors of 724.3%
and 94.0%, with maximum errors of 4529.9% and 435.9%, re-
spectively, when trained on the same dataset with NeuSight.
The main reason for the lower absolute percentage error of
NeuSight is that it does not directly use the MLP to make
latency predictions, instead applies GPU architecture and
execution insights atop the machine learning predictions.
In the case of newer generations GPUs like H100, which
exhibit features outside the distribution seen in the training
set, Habitat’s and Li et al. observe higher errors. The lower
error rate of NeuSight showcases its robustness in handling
out-of-distribution features and making accurate predictions
even on unseen GPUs.
Per-operator prediction error. Figure 8 shows the pre-
diction error for each kernel type (BMM, fully-connected,
element-wise, softmax, layer normalization), averaged across
all workloads evaluated in Figure 7. The roofline analysis
consistently shows a higher percentage error compared to
NeuSight for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
data points, with an average percentage error of 34%. The ac-
curacy of Habitat and Li et al. degrades on out-of-distribution
data points, particularly for BMM and fully-connected opera-
tors. Habitat and Li et al. show percentage error of 123.2% and
30.0% for BMM, and 799.3% and 152.6% for fully-connected
operators, respectively. In contrast, NeuSight shows better
10
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(a) Inference latency prediction error
(b) Training latency prediction error
Figure 7. The inference and training latency prediction percentage error of NeuSight and baselines with different batch sizes.
Out of distribution GPUs and models are highlighted. Certain models resulting in OOM are omitted due to space constraints.
Figure 8. Prediction percentage error for each operator type
(BMM, Fully-Connected (FC), Element-Wise (EW), Softmax,
Layer Normalization (LN)), averaged over all the evaluated
workloads.
accuracy than roofline analysis, Habitat and Li et al., with a
percentage error of 13.8% for BMM operators and 13.9% for
fully-connected operators.
Table 6 shows the contribution of each layer type to the
end-to-end latency. Since GEMM operations contribute the
most to the overall latency, accurate GEMM predictions of
NeuSight are crucial for maintaining low error rates in
end-to-end performance predictions. We observed higher
error rates for layer normalization due to its generally short
latency, which makes accurate predictions challenging. How-
ever, as layer normalization contributes only up-to 2% to the
overall latency, its higher error does not significantly affect
NeuSight’s end-to-end prediction accuracy.
Table 6. Per-operator contribution to the overall latency
for various models on H100 for model inference. The con-
tributions from different types of operators are shown as
percentages.
Model Batch Size BMM LINEAR EW SOFTMAX LN OTHERS
BERT-Large 16 12% 74% 10% 3% 2% 0%
GPT2-Large 4 11.8% 62.8% 14.9% 4.0% 1.1% 5.3%
OPT13 2 13.1% 62.9% 9.6% 5.9% 0.6% 7.8%
GPT3-XL 2 9.5% 76.4% 7.9% 2.5% 0.4% 3.3%
GPU across vendors (AMD). Modern GPUs, including
those from AMD, share many execution and deep learn-
ing concepts discussed in this paper. For instance, AMD’s
CDNA architecture uses multiple identical compute units
as its core building blocks, similar to NVIDIA’s Streaming
Multiprocessors (SMs), and AMD’s HIP programming model
employs workgroups similar to CUDA’s thread blocks[2].
We trained NeuSight using data from MI100 and MI210 and
evaluated its prediction accuracy on the MI250. We evaluated
the prediction accuracy of NeuSight across 5 model archi-
tectures varying batch sizes, including GPT3-XL, GPT3-2.7B,
and OPT-1.3B which contain out-of-distribution operations.
Figure 9 presents the AMD GPU evaluation results. Across
all tested models, NeuSight achieves an average percentage
error of 8.8% for inference and 15.7% for training, demonstrat-
ing its ability to generalize across different GPU vendors.
11
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
Table 7. The inference latency prediction percentage error of NeuSight with operator fusion with varying batch sizes.
Batch L4 A100-40GB H100
Size Non-fused Fused Non-fused Fused Non-fused Fused
BERT-Large 8 Measured Latency (ms) 409.9 344.1 205.5 174.8 69.8 65.0
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 350.1 (14.6%) 294.3 (14.5%) 216.7 (5.4%) 204.8 (17.2%) 86.2 (23.4%) 80.9 (24.6%)
16 Measured Latency (ms) 855.4 724.7 396.5 345.2 136.8 127.0
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 681.1 (20.4%) 573.4 (20.9%) 414.1 (4.5%) 391.5 (13.4%) 154.8 (13.2%) 144.7 (14.0%)
GPT2-Large 4 Measured Latency (ms) 1276.3 886.8 535.8 477.6 215.0 174.7
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 1135.9 (11.0%) 952.5 (7.4%) 576.2 (7.5%) 537.6 (12.6%) 208.4 (3.1%) 190.6 (9.1%)
8 Measured Latency (ms) 2563.0 1775.1 1084.7 948.5 414.3 343.4
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 2299.0 (10.3%) 1943.8 (9.5%) 1179.4 (8.7%) 1107.9 (16.8%) 442.5 (6.8%) 409.9 (19.4%)
(a) Inference latency prediction error
(b) Training latency prediction error
Figure 9. The inference and training latency prediction per-
centage error of NeuSight for various models across differ-
ent batch sizes on AMD MI100 and MI210 GPUs.
Operator fusion. Table 7 shows the inference latency pre-
diction error of BERT-Large and GPT2-Large with operator
fusion on L4, A100 (40GB), and H100. Using torch.compile
[47], the built-in operator fusion tool in PyTorch, we fused
the supported operators and measured the latency of the
fused models. NeuSight predicts latency with a 15.7% er-
ror across all fused models, 18.9% for BERT-Large, and
12.5% for GPT2-Large. This implies the generalizability of
NeuSight to capture the common optimizations employed
for deep learning kernels, as it distills the execution to tile
and waves.
Figure 10. Performance of (NxN) x (NxN) matrix multipli-
cation on H100 GPUs using FP16 numeric type and Tensor
Cores across different batch sizes.
New numerical type and hardware unit. Even in the
case of the introduction of new hardware units and soft-
ware changes, NeuSight can be adapted to predict the per-
formance of unseen hardware units. This is because core
concepts such as multiple identical processing units, tiled
execution, and fundamental performance equations remain
relevant. We demonstrate this adaptability in this experi-
ment, where NeuSight is tested on a new numerical type
(FP16) and a new hardware unit (Tensor Core). Figure 10
presents the latency predictions by NeuSight for FP16
matrix-multiplication on H100 Tensor Cores, illustrating
the versatility of NeuSight on new hardware. To adapt to
changes in hardware and software features, we adjust the
input features, accounting for the reduced memory require-
ment due to lower precision and the higher peak FLOPS to
reflect the enhanced compute capacity of the Tensor Core.
NeuSight predicts the latency of the batched matrix multi-
plication with an average error rate of 13%, showcasing its
reliability even with these hardware and software changes.
6.3 Distributed Execution Results
Single-server execution. Table 8 shows the training latency
predictions for distributed execution on two types of GPU
servers: one with 4 A100s-40GB connected via NVLink and 4
H100s in a DGX Box [34], training GPT2-Large and GPT3-XL.
The A100 GPUs are connected in a mesh topology with each
GPU using 12 NVLinks, providing a bi-directional bandwidth
of 600GB/s. In the H100 DGX system, each GPU is connected
12
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Table 8. The distributed training latency prediction percentage error of NeuSight on H100 and A100 GPU servers training
GPT2-Large and GPT3-XL with different global batch sizes. Models resulting in out-of-memory errors are marked as OOM.
Global A100-40GB x 4 (NVLink) H100 x 4 (DGX Box)
Batch Size Data Parallel Tensor Parallel Pipeline Parallel Data Parallel Tensor Parallel Pipeline Parallel
GPT2-Large 4 Measured Latency (ms) 452.3 484.9 1597.6 194.9 211.1 637.5
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 510.5 (12.9%) 525.6 (8.4%) 1761.6 (10.3%) 214.1 (9.9%) 228.1 (8.0%) 650.2 (2.0%)
16 Measured Latency (ms) OOM OOM OOM 642.1 729.7 2384.0
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 649.6 (1.2%) 825.1 (13.1%) 2638.4 (10.7%)
GPT3-XL 4 Measured Latency (ms) OOM OOM OOM OOM 1010.5 3554.4
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 1047.6 (3.7%) 3717.0 (4.6%)
Table 9. NeuSight prediction for multi-node distributed
execution of GPT-3 on H100 GPUs.
# Nodes 1 4 384 768 3840
NeuSight Prediction (ms) 1514.9 1836.7 12028.3 12135.5 12564.6
with 18 NVLinks, providing a bi-directional bandwidth of
900GB/s. Both configurations enable full-bandwidth commu-
nication between any two GPUs. We evaluate NeuSight on
data, tensor model, and pipeline parallel execution, albeit
individually. This is because NeuSight aims to also estimate
the latency for a wide range of models, including the ones
which cannot fit on a single device due to memory, thus
require tensor model or pipeline to split the DNN graph. For
each method, we split the execution across the 4 GPUs, and
use a single micro-batch.
Across all the models, NeuSight predicts the latency of
distributed training with an average error of 7.7%, including
6.7% for the H100 server and 10.5% for the A100 server. This
demonstrates that NeuSight predicts effectively for per-
kernel, per-GPU, and distributed execution on various GPUs
and server types. This is mainly due to the robust underlying
mechanism of kernel estimation, that can be extended with
the network level estimates to forecast distributed execution
latencies.
Multi-node distributed execution. Extending beyond
single-server execution, NeuSight can be used with net-
working simulators to predict multi-node execution where
GPUs communicate across different servers. While simulat-
ing multi-server networks is well handled by tools such as
ASTRA-Sim [52] and ns-3 [31], NeuSight’s predictions can
be integrated with these simulators to forecast multi-node
distributed training. To demonstrate this capability, we pro-
vide estimation results for executing GPT-3 across 1 to 3840
nodes for a single iteration. The experimental infrastructure
consists of nodes equipped with 8 H100 GPUs each, intercon-
nected via a multi-level fat-tree network using InfiniBand
switches, with a link bandwidth of 100 Gbps. Nodes are con-
nected hierarchically across levels consisting of 4, 384, 768,
and up to 3840 nodes. Each DGX server provides GPU-to-
GPU bandwidth of 900GB/s [34]. For the distributed training
configuration, we use an 8-wide Tensor Model parallel setup
within each server, while we use data parallelism across the
nodes. The per-node batch size is set to 8, and the global batch
size scales as 8 times the number of nodes. NeuSight handles
per-device predictions, while the analytical network perfor-
mance model from the previous subsection estimates the
communication latency for AllReduce operations across the
switched network. Due to resource constraints, we cannot
validate this prediction on a real cluster of this size.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we present a novel framework, NeuSight, that
forecasts the performance of deep learning execution on GPU
servers. In developing NeuSight, we leverage the execution
deep learning kernel on a GPU architecture such as tiled
execution and use this insight to decompose the prediction
problem to smaller sub-problems, i.e., per-tile prediction. For
each tile, we use machine learning models to capture the com-
plex non-linear relationship between achieved throughput
and input features, and impose performance laws to bound
the predicted latency. Results on a variety of models and
GPUs, show that NeuSight can provide better predictions
than prior work in the area. We open-sourced NeuSight to
benefit broader research community. 1
8 Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments. This research was supported through computational
resources provided by Partnership for an Advanced Comput-
ing Environment (PACE) at Georgia Tech, Institute for Data
Engineering and Science (IDEaS) at Georgia Tech, Google
Cloud, and AMD HPC Fund Research Cloud. This work is
partially supported by Gifts from Google and AMD. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the au-
thors. They should not be interpreted as representing the
official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied,
of Georgia Tech or Meta.
1NeuSight is available at github.com/sitar-lab/NeuSight
13
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
A Artifact Appendix
A.1 Abstract
The artifact includes source code, Python scripts, and predic-
tion datasets required to reproduce the error rates of different
ML models on various GPUs, as described in the Evaluation
section (Section 6).
A.2 Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Algorithm: ML-based GPU execution time predictor
• Program: Python, PyTorch
• Model: Transformer models from HuggingFace
• Data set: Measured latencies of single kernels and end-to-
end ML model executions collected from 8 NVIDIA GPUs
and 3 AMD GPUs (available in the GitHub repository)
• Run-time environment:
– Ubuntu 20.04, Python 3.9, PyTorch 2.1.0 or similar
– (If collecting datasets from scratch) PyTorch 2.1 + CUDA
12.1 and PyTorch 2.4 + RoCM 6.1
• Hardware:
– Any GPU supporting PyTorch 2.1 or similar
– (If collecting datasets from scratch) P4, P100, V100, T4,
A100, L4, H100, MI100, MI200, and MI250
• Execution: (If collecting datasets from scratch) Sole GPU
usage recommended for profiling
• Metrics: Predicted latency and prediction error
• Output: CSV-formatted predicted latency and prediction
error values used for tables and figures in the Evaluation
section (Section 6)
• Disk space required: ~50 GB
• Time to prepare workflow: ~1 hour
• Time to complete experiments: ~1 hour using the pro-
vided dataset; ~10 hours to collect datasets, labels, and traces
from scratch
• Publicly available: Yes
A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to access. The scripts and code are available
at https://github.com/sitar-lab/NeuSight. Documentation
and setup instructions for artifact evaluation are included in
scripts/asplos/README.
A.3.2 Hardware dependencies. Experiments were con-
ducted on P4, P100, V100, T4, A100, L4, H100, MI100, MI200,
and MI250. If using the provided dataset, any GPU support-
ing PyTorch 2.1 or similar is sufficient.
A.3.3 Software dependencies.
• For NVIDIA GPUs: Ubuntu 20.04 or similar, Python
3.9, PyTorch 2.1.0, CUDA Toolkit 12.1
• For AMD GPUs: RHEL 9.4 or similar, Python 3.12.5,
PyTorch 2.4.1, RoCM 6.1
A.3.4 Data sets. The publicly available dataset included
in the GitHub repository contains operator latencies and
ground truth latency measurements of various ML models
across different GPUs.
A.4 Installation and Testing
A.4.1 Installation.
git clone https://github.com/sitar-lab/NeuSight
cd NeuSight
pip install -e .
A.4.2 Basic Test.
bash scripts/example/gpt3_inference_h100.sh
The printed output should be approximately ~670 ms.
A.5 Experiment workflow
1. (Optional) Run scripts to collect datasets from scratch.
2. (Optional) Train NeuSight with the collected dataset.
3. Use the provided evaluation scripts to predict model exe-
cution latencies on GPUs evaluated in the paper.
4. Compare predictions against ground truth using the pro-
vided summary.py and table.py scripts.
A.6 Evaluation and expected results
The artifact reproduces the results shown in Figures 7, 8, and
9, and Tables 7 and 8 of the paper. Data for these figures
and tables is available in /scripts/asplos/summary. Note
that latency predictions may vary slightly (~10%) due to the
non-deterministic behavior of DNN models.
References
[1] AMD. 2022. AMD CDNA 2 ARCHITECTURE. https:
//www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/instinct-
business-docs/white-papers/amd-cdna2-white-paper.pdf.
[2] AMD. 2024. AMD Instinct Accelerators. https://www.amd.com/en/
products/accelerators/instinct.html.
[3] AMD. 2024. AMD Instinct HPC Solutions. https://www.amd.com/en/
graphics/servers-instinct-mi-powered-servers.
[4] Newsha Ardalani, Clint Lestourgeon, Karthikeyan Sankaralingam,
and Xiaojin Zhu. 2015. Cross-architecture performance prediction
(XAPP) using CPU code to predict GPU performance. In International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[5] Cesar Avalos Baddouh, Mahmoud Khairy, Roland N. Green, Mathias
Payer, and Timothy G. Rogers. 2021. Principal Kernel Analysis: A
Tractable Methodology to Simulate Scaled GPU Workloads. In Inter-
national Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[6] Ali Bakhoda, George L. Yuan, Wilson W. L. Fung, Henry Wong, and
Tor M. Aamodt. 2009. Analyzing CUDA workloads using a detailed
GPU simulator. In International Symposium on Performance Analysis
of Systems Software (ISPASS).
[7] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot
Learners. arXiv:2005.14165 [cs.CL]
[8] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie
Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis
Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2018. TVM: An
Automated End-to-End Optimizing Compiler for Deep Learning. In
14
Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and Inference ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI).
[9] Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2019. Eyeriss
v2: A Flexible Accelerator for Emerging Deep Neural Networks on
Mobile Devices. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits
and Systems 9, 2 (2019).
[10] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
2022. FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with
IO-Awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[11] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding. In Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL).
[12] Forbes. 2024. Meta To Build Open-Source Artificial General Intel-
ligence For All, Zuckerberg Says . https://www.forbes.com/sites/
johnkoetsier/2024/01/18/zuckerberg-on-ai-meta-building-agi-for-
everyone-and-open-sourcing-it.
[13] Jeremy Fowers, Kalin Ovtcharov, Michael Papamichael, Todd Mas-
sengill, Ming Liu, Daniel Lo, Shlomi Alkalay, Michael Haselman, Lo-
gan Adams, Mahdi Ghandi, Stephen Heil, Prerak Patel, Adam Sapek,
Gabriel Weisz, Lisa Woods, Sitaram Lanka, Steve Reinhardt, Adrian
Caulfield, Eric Chung, and Doug Burger. 2018. A Configurable Cloud-
Scale DNN Processor for Real-Time AI. In International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[14] Google. 2024. TensorFlow. https://www.tensorflow.org/.
[15] Hyesoon Hong, Sunpyo Kim. 2009. An analytical model for a GPU ar-
chitecture with memory-level and thread-level parallelism awareness.
In International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[16] Samuel Hsia, Alicia Golden, Bilge Acun, Newsha Ardalani, Zachary
DeVito, Gu-Yeon Wei, David Brooks, and Carole-Jean Wu. 2024. MAD
Max Beyond Single-Node: Enabling Large Machine Learning Model
Acceleration on Distributed Systems. In International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[17] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao
Chen, Mia Xu Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le,
Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. 2019. GPipe: Efficient Training of
Giant Neural Networks using Pipeline Parallelism. In International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeuRIPS).
[18] Mikhail Isaev, Nic Mcdonald, Larry Dennison, and Richard Vuduc.
2023. Calculon: a methodology and tool for high-level co-design of
systems and large language models. In Proceedings of the International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis (SC).
[19] Wenhao Jia, Kelly A. Shaw, and Margaret Martonosi. 2012. Stargazer:
Automated regression-based GPU design space exploration. In In-
ternational Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems Software
(ISPASS).
[20] Norman P. Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagara-
jan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing,
Brian Towles, Cliff Young, Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou, and David
Patterson. 2023. TPU v4: An Optically Reconfigurable Supercom-
puter for Machine Learning with Hardware Support for Embeddings.
arXiv:2304.01433 [cs.AR]
[21] Mahmoud Khairy, Zhesheng Shen, Tor M. Aamodt, and Timothy G.
Rogers. 2020. Accel-Sim: An Extensible Simulation Framework for
Validated GPU Modeling. In International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA).
[22] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2012. Im-
ageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeuRIPS).
[23] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2017. Ima-
geNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. Com-
mun. ACM 60, 6 (May 2017), 84–90.
[24] Aviral Kumar, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, Milad Hashemi Kevin Swersky,
and Sergey Levine. 2022. Data-Driven Offline Optimization For Archi-
tecting Hardware Accelerators. In International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeuRIPS).
[25] Hyoukjun Kwon, Prasanth Chatarasi, Michael Pellauer, Angshuman
Parashar, Vivek Sarkar, and Tushar Krishna. 2019. Understanding
reuse, performance, and hardware cost of DNN dataflows: A data-
centric approach. In International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO).
[26] Ying Li, Yifan Sun, and Adwait Jog. 2023. Path Forward Beyond
Simulators: Fast and Accurate GPU Execution Time Prediction for
DNN Workloads. In International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO) (2023-10-28).
[27] Divya Mahajan, Joon Kyung Kim, Jacob Sacks, Adel Ardalan, Arun Ku-
mar, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. 2018. In-RDBMS Hardware Acceleration
of Advanced Analytics.
[28] Divya Mahajan, Jongse Park, Emmanuel Amaro, Hardik Sharma, Amir
Yazdanbakhsh, Joon Kim, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. 2016. Tabla: A Uni-
fied Template-based Framework for Accelerating Statistical Machine
Learning. In International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA).
[29] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri,
Nikhil R. Devanur, Gregory R. Ganger, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Matei
Zaharia. 2019. PipeDream: generalized pipeline parallelism for DNN
training. In ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSP).
[30] Deepak Narayanan, Amar Phanishayee, Kaiyu Shi, Xie Chen, and
Matei Zaharia. 2021. Memory-efficient pipeline-parallel DNN training.
In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 7937–7947.
[31] nsnam. 2024. ns-3. https://www.nsnam.org/.
[32] NVIDIA. 2017. CUTLASS: Fast Linear Algebra in CUDA C++. https:
//developer.nvidia.com/blog/cutlass-linear-algebra-cuda/.
[33] NVIDIA. 2023. GPU Performance Background. https:
//docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/pdf/GPU-
Performance-Background-User-Guide.pdf.
[34] NVIDIA. 2023. NVIDIA DGX H100. https://resources.nvidia.com/en-
us-dgx-systems/ai-enterprise-dgx.
[35] NVIDIA. 2023. NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture. https:
//resources.nvidia.com/en-us-tensor-core.
[36] NVIDIA. 2024. GPU Performance Background User’s Guide.
https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-
gpu-background/index.html#gpu-execution.
[37] NVIDIA. 2024. NVIDIA Blackwell Architecture Technical Brief. https:
//resources.nvidia.com/en-us-blackwell-architecture.
[38] NVIDIA. 2024. NVIDIA cuDNN. https://developer.nvidia.com/cudnn.
[39] NVIDIA. 2024. NVIDIA Data Center GPUs. https://www.nvidia.com/
en-us/data-center/data-center-gpus/.
[40] Nvidia. 2024. Nvidia DGX Platform. https://www.nvidia.com/en-
us/data-center/dgx-platform/.
[41] NVIDIA. 2024. NVlink. https://developer.nvidia.com/nccl.
[42] MohammadHossein Olyaiy, Christopher Ng, Alexandra Sasha Fe-
dorova, and Mieszko Lis. 2023. Sunstone: A Scalable and Versatile
Scheduler for Mapping Tensor Algebra on Spatial Accelerators. In
International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems Software
(ISPASS).
[43] Kenneth O’Neal, Philip Brisk, Emily Shriver, and Michael Kishinevsky.
2017. HALWPE: Hardware-assisted light weight performance estima-
tion for GPUs. In Design Automation Conference (DAC).
[44] Kishore Punniyamurthy, Behzad Boroujerdian, and Andreas Gerstlauer.
2017. GATSim: abstract timing simulation of GPUs.
[45] PyTorch. 2023. PyTorch Profiler. https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/
recipes/profiler_recipe.html
[46] PyTorch. 2023. torch.fx-PyTorch 2.2 documentation. https://
pytorch.org/docs/stable/fx.html.
[47] PyTorch. 2024. Introduction to torch.compile. https://pytorch.org/
tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html.
15
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, & Divya Mahajan
[48] PyTorch. 2024. PyTorch. https://pytorch.org/.
[49] Hang Qi, Evan R Sparks, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2017. PALEO: A
PERFORMANCE MODEL FOR DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
[50] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask
Learners. (2019).
[51] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan
Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2023.
Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text
Transformer. arXiv:1910.10683 [cs.LG]
[52] Saeed Rashidi, Srinivas Sridharan, Sudarshan Srinivasan, and Tushar
Krishna. 2020. ASTRA-SIM: Enabling SW/HW Co-Design Exploration
for Distributed DL Training Platforms. In International Symposium on
Performance Analysis of Systems Software (ISPASS).
[53] Hardik Sharma, Jongse Park, Divya Mahajan, Emmanuel Amaro,
Joon Kyung Kim, Chenkai Shao, Asit Mishra, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh.
2016. From High-Level Deep Neural Models to FPGAs. In International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[54] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2015. Very Deep
Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition.
arXiv:1409.1556 [cs.CV]
[55] Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGres-
ley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prab-
humoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Rewon
Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Moham-
mad Shoeybi, Yuxiong He, Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and
Bryan Catanzaro. 2022. Using DeepSpeed and Megatron to Train
Megatron-Turing NLG 530B, A Large-Scale Generative Language
Model. arXiv:2201.11990 [cs.CL]
[56] Chris Tofallis. 2015. A better measure of relative prediction accuracy
for model selection and model estimation. Journal of the Operational
Research Society (JORS) (2015).
[57] Weiyang Wang, Moein Khazraee, Zhizhen Zhong, Manya Ghobadi,
Zhihao Jia, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Ying Zhang, and Anthony Kewitsch.
2023. TopoOpt: Co-optimizing Network Topology and Paralleliza-
tion Strategy for Distributed Training Jobs. In USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI).
[58] Xiebing Wang, Kai Huang, Alois Knoll, and Xuehai Qian. 2019. A
Hybrid Framework for Fast and Accurate GPU Performance Estima-
tion through Source-Level Analysis and Trace-Based Simulation. In
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA).
[59] Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David Patterson. 2009.
Roofline: an insightful visual performance model for multicore ar-
chitectures. Commun. ACM (2009).
[60] Gene Wu, Joseph L. Greathouse, Alexander Lyashevsky, Nuwan
Jayasena, and Derek Chiou. 2015. GPGPU performance and power
estimation using machine learning. In International Symposium on
High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA).
[61] Gyeongsik Yang, Changyong Shin, Jeunghwan Lee, Yeonho Yoo, and
Chuck Yoo. 2022. Prediction of the Resource Consumption of Dis-
tributed Deep Learning Systems. In Proceedings of the ACM on Mea-
surement and Analysis of Computing Systems (POMACS).
[62] Geoffrey X. Yu, Yubo Gao, Pavel Golikov, and Gennady Pekhimenko.
2021. Habitat: A Runtime-Based Computational Performance Predictor
for Deep Neural Network Training. In Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC).
[63] Hongyu Zhu, Amar Phanishayee, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2020.
Daydream: Accurately Estimating the Efficacy of Optimizations for
DNN Training. In Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC).
16
