MICRO 2024: Home
MICRO 2024
Submit Work
Call for Papers
Submission Guidelines
HotCRP Submission Site
Camera-Ready Guidelines
Artifact Evaluation
Call for Workshops & Tutorials
Call for PhD Forum
Student Research Competition
Program
Main Program
Workshops & Tutorials
Attend
Venue & Hotel
Register for the Conference
Visa Information
Student Travel Grants
Committees
Organizing Committee
Program Committee
Steering Committee
Code of Conduct
@MicroArchConf
microarch.org
Home
MICRO 2024
57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
®
November 2 – November 6, 2024
Austin, Texas, USA
Important Dates
Full Paper Deadline:
April 18, 2024 at 11:59 PM
CDT
Camera-Ready Deadline:
September 12, 2024
Hotel Rates Guaranteed Until:
October 2, 2024
(subject to availability)
Early Registration Deadline:
October 2, 2024
Today's Program
Register for MICRO 2024
Registration Info
The
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
®
is the premier forum
          for presenting, discussing, and debating innovative microarchitecture ideas and techniques
          for advanced computing and communication systems. This symposium brings together
          researchers in fields related to microarchitecture, compilers, chips, and systems for
          technical exchange on traditional microarchitecture topics and emerging research areas.
          The MICRO community has enjoyed a close interaction between academic researchers and
          industrial designers, and we aim to continue this tradition at MICRO-57.
          In 2024, MICRO goes to Austin, Texas, USA.
Announcements
MICRO is Almost at Capacity!
October 24, 2024
This year we have the fortune of benefiting from a great deal of enthusiasm for the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture conference in Austin, Nov 2nd through 6th.
            As a result we are looking at a record breaking number of registrants this year.
            Unfortunately, the downside is that we are likely to exceed the venue capacity for the main conference before the conference's opening date. We expect to reach this limit within the next week and once this happens we will close any new registrations. If you are interested in attending please register ASAP to ensure you are able to attend. It is unlikely that we will have any on-site registration.
            We are looking forward to seeing as many of you as possible in two weeks!
The Micro'24 GCs
            Paul, Jose, and Jason
Explore the full schedule of groundbreaking research papers and keynote talks set to take place at MICRO 2024.
Check out the complete program.
For more information about registering for MICRO 2024 please see the
registration page
.
The MICRO Main Program is Live!
September 23, 2024
We're excited to share that the paper program for the 57th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) is now live!
            Explore the full schedule of groundbreaking research papers and keynote talks set to take place at MICRO 2024.
Check out the complete program.
Stay tuned for more updates, and we look forward to seeing you at the symposium!
For more information about registering for MICRO 2024 please see the
registration page
.
Early Registration and Hotel Booking is Open!
September 25 & October 2, 2024
We are excited to announce that registration for the 57th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO 2024) is now open!
            MICRO 2024 will be held from November 2-6, 2024 in Austin, Texas, USA
            The early registration deadline is October 2.

            Additionally, special rates for hotel accommodations are available for conference attendees, but rooms are limited,
            so we encourage you to book your stay as soon as possible.
For more information about registering for MICRO 2024 please see the
registration page
.
For more information about the hotel and conference location,
            please see the
venue and hotel information page
.
uArch Workshop Applications are Open!
September 20, 2024
The
uArch Workshop
is for undergraduates and Master’s students who are considering a PhD in Computer Architecture.
            We provide travel grants to partially fund a subset of students, prioritizing inclusion, with a special encouragement
            for students from the South and Southwest regions of the country. The grant covers lodging and registration for the uArch Workshop
            (Sunday, Nov 3rd) and MICRO. It does not cover travel to MICRO.
            To apply, please go to the uArch website. Application deadline is September 20th, and you will be notified by September 27th.
For more information about applying please see the
uArch page
.
Travel Grant Applications are Open!
September 18, 2024
We invite highschool, undergraduate, M.S., and Ph.D. to apply for travel grants to attend MICRO 2024!
            Through generous support from ACM SIGMICRO, IEEE TCuARCH, and the NSF, we will provide travel support for students to defray a
            portion of their overall travel expenses.
            The size and number of awards will vary depending on funding availability, the number of student applicants, and their respective priorities.
            Expenses will be reimbursed after the conference, and grant recipients will be asked to submit original receipts to verify their expenditures.
            If you are interested in applying for a travel grant, please view
            the
submission guidelines and instructions
.
Student Research Competition Submissions is Open!
September 1, 2024
We invite undergraduate and graduate students to participate
            in the ACM Student Research Competition (SRC)!
            The SRC is a forum for both undergrad and
            grad students to share their research results.
            Top winners will receive monetary prizes, and first-place
            winners will be invited to participate in the SRC Grand Finals.
            If you are interested in submitting to the SRC, please view
            the
submission guidelines and instructions
.
PhD Forum Submissions is Open!
August 25, 2024
We invite senior PhD students to participate in the PhD Forum!
            The PhD Forum is a session for Ph.D students to present their dissertation research and gain visibility within the computer
            architecture community as they prepare for the academic job market.
            The PhD Forum welcomes presentations on any topic in computer architecture.
            If you are interested in submitting to the PhD Forum, please view
            the
submission guidelines and instructions
.
Tweets
Platinum Sponsors
Arm
AWS
Futurewei
Qualcomm
Gold Sponsors
AMD
IBM
MangoBoost
Meta
Rebellions
TAMU ECE
UT Austin ECE
Silver Sponsors
Google
VMware
Technical Sponsors & Student Travel Grant Sponsors
TCuARCH
NSF
ACM SIGMICRO
© 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
®
IEEE Privacy Policy