ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Cunchi Lv et al.

Table 1. Comparison of GPU provisioning in serverless. Dilu
allows the definition of unequal request and limit quotas during profiling and dynamically adjusts resource provisioning
based on real-time demand.
Mechanism

Req/Lim

Allocation

Resourcing

Exclusive
MPS
Dilu

equal,1
equal,<1
unequal,<1

profiling-based
profiling-based

static
static
On-Demand

User

Developer
deploy

submit

invoke

Gateway

Profiler

Scheduler

Load
Balancer

Workload
Monitor

Affinity-First
Collocation

dispatch

function: {
type,
SMR <req, limit>,
MS,
IBS,
…},
…
Metadata

Local Scaler

Global Scaler

Adaptive 2D Co-Scaling

Local Scaler

Local Scaler

f

f

f

f

Scaling
Plane

Scaling Up/Down

Scaling In/Out

f

Control
Plane

launch / terminate

Kernel & Token Issue Control

Function
Instances

Defragmentation
Collocation

f

f

f

f

f

f

Collocation

Serving
Plane

GPUs

Two keep-alive inference function instances only handle 3-4
requests within a nearly-50s lifecycle. It means the keepalive strategy brings over 95% of resource waste in the time
dimension.
Implications. The GPU fragmentation and allocation
limitation pull down the elasticity and deployment density
[11] of serverless DL functions, increasing both user and
provider costs. We argue that a proper GPU resourcing-ondemand mechanism is imperative and essential for current
serverless DL serving.
2.4

Motivation and Challenges

Insight: Introspective Elasticity. Introspective Elasticity (IE) is a specialized mechanism for GPU resourcing-ondemand. It refers to a holistic and novel GPU provisioning
paradigm tailored for serverless DL functions, which provides fine-grained, continuous and adaptive GPU resources.
Unlike current horizontal-only elasticity in serverless [19,
51], which merely provides discrete GPU provisioning and
focuses solely on eliminating external resource fragments,
IE expands it by dynamically multiplexing internal GPU
fragments of instances according to real-time kernel-level
workloads, to maximize GPU utilization.
IE requires the system to identify static GPU fragments,
which provides the opportunity to eliminate them with the
collocation method. It also emphasizes the need to efficiently
reuse dynamic fragments generated by varying workloads.
More importantly, these two capabilities ought to be coordinated to effectively manage bursty workloads.
Preliminary Verification. We verify this idea through a
toy experiment using Exclusive and Collocation setups with
serverless functions: the Exclusive setup involves 4 GPUs, 3
GPUs for training and 1 GPU for inference. In contrast, the
Collocation mode occupies only 3 GPUs, each collocating a
training worker and an inference worker (vertical scaling).
For the collocation case, requests are loaded balance to 3
inference workers (horizontal scaling). The results in subfigures 2(c) and 2(d) show that on top of saving 25% of GPU
resources, the co-scaling mechanism effectively improves
inference throughput by 46% with QoS guarantees while
merely decreasing throughout of the collocated training task
by 5.2% at RPS=256.

Cluster

Node-1

Node-2

Node-n

Figure 3. The system architecture of Dilu.
Challenges. IE is carried out by essential co-scaling but
builds on indispensable profiling and scheduling. However,
building such a serverless DL system with IE support is nontrivial. Challenge 1: It is costly and difficult to precisely
measure the basic GPU resource quotas required to guarantee QoS for each DL function. The profiling result helps
prevent overprovisioning and converts previously internal
GPU fragments of DL functions into external resources for
potential reassignment. Diverse factors, including DL function types or priorities, varying model sizes, and complex
execution patterns (e.g., batching for inference), exacerbate
the profiling sampling spaces. Challenge 2: It requires wise
scheduling to reuse GPU fragments and make collocation
decisions efficiently. The real-time fluctuations of function
workloads and the cluster’s resource status expand the scheduling and collocation search space, making it challenging
to achieve multiple objectives simultaneously (e.g., defragmentation, QoS guarantees). Challenge 3: A deliberate and
cross-layer coordination mechanism is needed to handle resource contention of collocated tasks. For example, under the
high RPS (e.g., 256 and 512), there exist serious inference SLO
violations in Figure 2(c) and training throughput decrease
in Figure 2(d), caused by blunt high-level horizontal scaling
and disordered low-level vertical scaling.

3

System Design

This section outlines the design of Dilu. We first describe
the system’s execution workflow (Section 3.1), followed by
detailed explanations of key components. Section 3.2 profiles
resources to identify available GPU fragments. Section 3.3
involves GPU allocation principles from the global scheduler’s perspective. Lastly, Section 3.4 presents the core 2D
co-scaling mechanism for GPU resourcing-on-demand.
3.1

Architecture Overview

Dilu is a serverless DL system with introspective elasticity
support for GPU resourcing-on-demand. It collocates DL
functions with resource-complementarity concerns to reduce

