ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Therefore, the core idea is to dynamically allocate GPU tokens for collocated instances on the same GPUs based on
KLC changes of high-priority task instances, without monitoring reactive metrics from the application layer.
Specifically, when the calculated KLC increases significantly (line 14), it implies either a bursty workload of itself or overly aggressive GPU provisioning for its collocated instances. Then RCKM sets the global variable state to
𝐸𝑀𝐸𝑅𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑌 and fast resizes up its issued tokens (line 15).
Accordingly, the collocated instances are temporarily resized
down based on the KLC variation (line 26-27). Only the current instance can reset or modify the 𝐸𝑀𝐸𝑅𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑌 state.
Next, we explain the dynamicity. If no kernels have been
launched recently, then the instance will scale down (line 1617). And if its collocated instances have not launched kernels
recently, its quotas will gradually be increased (line 18-19).
Otherwise, RCKM will maintain the current provisioning
plans in the relatively stable CONTENTION state.
Discussion. Different from previous spatio-temporal GPU
sharing methods in [8, 19, 23], which all depend on static
MPS [38] allocation technique, Dilu enables basic spatial
sharing via collocation and fine-grained token issuing management based on pre-profiled <request, limit> meta-quota
to avoid task starvation and GPU overprovisioning. In the
temporal dimension, it dynamically allocates tokens between
<request, limit> from a global perspective (RCKM), ensuring high utilization of the entire GPU. Moreover, Dilu relies
on the isolation properties of containers for security, providing reliable protection for multi-tenant services. As for
fault tolerance, Dilu leverages the classic restart strategy in
serverless.
3.4.2 Lazy Scaling Out/In. Dilu also facilitates introspective horizontal scaling, effectively integrating it with vertical
scaling to amplify system resilience.
Classic horizontal-only scaling (e.g., FaST-GS [19]) launches
or terminates function instances reactively as workloads increase or drop. Advanced approaches (e.g., INFless [51] and
Azure Serverless [42]) calculate pre-warming and keep-alive
duration based on prior knowledge to associate workload prediction with pre-provisioning. However, due to short-term
unpredictability, these strategies still incur significant cold
start overheads caused by the slow and bulky deployment
of large DL functions. It also leads to severe SLO violations.
Instead, Dilu strengthens horizontal scaling in cooperation
with fast vertical scaling to manage the burst workloads.
Specifically, Dilu handles sudden workload increases by
first triggering fast scaling-up, adaptively delaying the scalingout execution and avoiding cold starts caused by few-secondlevel bursty requests. The global scaler maintains a sliding
window (i.e., size=40s) for each function to guide the horizontal scaling. If at least 𝜙 out RPS values within the window
exceed the serving throughput of deployed instances (acquired from profiling), the scaler informs the scheduler to

Cunchi Lv et al.

Algorithm 2 Fast Scale-up/down Control Algorithm
1: Input:

𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠: Maximum number of tokens that can be issued.
𝑅𝑊 : Kernel rate windows for instances.
4:
𝑅current : Current kernel execution rate.
5:
𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 : Request/limit rate for the instance.
6:
𝑇 𝑦𝑝𝑒: Type of the instance (e.g., SLO-sensitive).
7:
𝑇current ,𝑇min : Current and minimum recorded KLCs.
8: Output:
9:
𝑅issue : Issued tokens of the instance during this cycle.
10: function IssueToken
11:
Shift Rate Window 𝑅𝑊 [𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ] with 𝑅current .
12:
if Type is SLO-sensitive then
𝑇
−𝑇min
13:
Δ𝑇 = current
⊲ Calculate the relative change
𝑇min
14:
if Δ𝑇 > 𝜂 𝑣𝑖𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 then
⊲ Trigger protective logic, scale up
15:
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒, 𝑅issue ← 𝐸𝑀𝐸𝑅𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑌 , 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡
16:
else if sum(𝑅𝑊 [𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ] ) == 0 then
⊲ Scale down
17:
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒, 𝑅issue ← 𝑅𝐸𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝐸𝑅𝑌 , 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡
18:
else if sum(𝑅𝑊 [𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠 ] ) == 0 then
⊲ Scale up
19:
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒, 𝑅issue ← 𝑅𝐸𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝐸𝑅𝑌 , 𝑅last ∗ 𝜂𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒
20:
else
21:
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒, 𝑅issue ← 𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑇 𝐸𝑁𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁 , 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡
22:
else
23:
switch 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 do
24:
case 𝑁 𝑂𝑁 𝐸:
⊲ Without collocation instances
25:
𝑅issue ← 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡
26:
case 𝐸𝑀𝐸𝑅𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑌 :
⊲ Scale down
27:
𝑅issue ← min(𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑅last )/Δ𝑇
28:
case 𝑅𝐸𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝐸𝑅𝑌 :
⊲ Scale up
29:
𝑅issue ← min(𝑅last ∗ 𝜂𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 , 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ∗ 𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 )
30:
case 𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑇 𝐸𝑁𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁 :
31:
𝑅issue ← 𝑅last
2:
3:

launch new instances. Here, 𝜙 out (i.e., 20) indicates a relatively stable high workload. Conversely, to avoid frequent
restarts of new instances, a scaling-in decision is only triggered if more than 𝜙 in (i.e., 30) RPS values in the window
fall below the serving throughput of (# of instances - 1).
Notably, the lazy scaling-out only occupies a small portion
of GPU memory (as shown in Figure 2(b)). Due to the fast
scaling-down mechanism mentioned above, the idle SMs can
be dynamically reallocated to other collocated instances.

4

System Implementation

Prototype system. We have implemented a prototype system based on Docker and Kubernetes, with 5k lines of code,
including 2k+ python LOC for the scheduler and 3k+ C LOC
for the scaler. Additionally, we have developed 3k+ lines
of code for simulation, evaluation and scripts. The profiler,
scheduler, and global scalers are all deployed within containers. Dilu is compatible with any CUDA-based programming
framework like [14, 17, 31].
Serverless DL Functions. In the system, we build a DL
function with model-parameter files, an execution entry
script and groups of DL runtimes, including Pytorch, transformers, or deepspeed libraries. We also pack IL with each
DL function and add its path to the /etc/ld.so.preload file.

