ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

(a) Resnet152

Cunchi Lv et al.

(b) RoBERTa-large

(c) GPT2-large

(d) LLaMA2-7B

Resourcing-Complementary Scheduling

min
s.t.

𝑛
∑︁

𝑔𝑖

(1)

𝑓𝑖 𝑗 ≥ 1, ∀𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑚,

(2)

𝑡 (𝑓 𝑗 ) ≤ 𝑄 𝑗 , ∀𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑚,
𝑚
∑︁
𝑀 (𝑓𝑖 𝑗 ) <= 𝑀 (𝑔𝑖 ),

(3)

𝑖=1
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1

(4)

𝑗=1

𝑔𝑖 = 1 if

𝑚
∑︁

𝑓𝑖 𝑗 ≥ 1 else 𝑔𝑖 = 0,

(5)

𝑗=1

𝑓𝑖 𝑗 ∈ {0, 1}, ∀𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛, ∀𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑚.

(6)

The scheduling can be regarded as a 2D bin-packing problem, by coordinating SMR (with IBS) and memory size. It is
a well-known NP-complete problem, hence Dilu adopts a
heuristic greedy Algorithm 1 to reduce complexity, which
adheres to the following three principles.

Func-b instance-1

Func-c instance-1

Func-a instance-1

Func-a instance-2

timeline

(a) Without workload affinity

SMR

3.3

The scheduler manages the GPU allocation plans of DL functions at the cluster level, and makes collocation decisions.
The primary goal is to improve GPU cluster utilization and
aggregate throughput, increasing the deployment density
[11] of DL tasks with QoS guarantees. The objective is formalized in Equation 1, minimizing the number of GPUs used,
where 𝑛 represents the number of GPUs in the cluster, and
𝑔𝑖 = 1 indicates GPU 𝑖 is occupied, otherwise idle. Constraint 2 ensures that each function instance 𝑓 𝑗 is allocated
to at least one GPU, where 𝑚 denotes the number of all instances and 𝑓𝑖 𝑗 = 1 indicates 𝑓 𝑗 occupies GPU 𝑖. Constraint
3 ensures that the execution time of 𝑓 𝑗 (compute resource
requirements) meets the corresponding QoS 𝑄 𝑗 . Constraint 4
ensures that the total memory usage of collocated instances
remains within the limit of a single GPU card. Constraint 5
ensures that GPU 𝑖 is marked as occupied if it is assigned
any 𝑓 𝑗 .

SMR

Figure 4. Throughput efficiency under varying SM rates and batch sizes for inference models with specific SLO targets. The
star indicates the optimal configuration pair <IBS, SMR>, blue points denote configurations meeting SLOs, red crosses indicate
SLO violations, and the black solid line shows the forward path with the dashed line representing blocked paths.

Func-b instance-1

Func-b instance-2

Func-a instance-1

Func-a instance-2

timeline

(b) With workload affinity

Figure 5. Workload-affinity effect comparison.
Principle-1: Reducing laggers with affinity-first collocation. Each DL function may differ in its characteristics
and workload, and impact the SM consumption accordingly.
Random scheduling may lead to situations shown in Figure 5(a), where the resources allocated to instances of training Func-a vary differently. It results in a severe barrel effect
since the training speed depends on the lagger instance with
the least compute resources. Considering the runtime affinity of functions, Dilu strategically collocates instances with
similar workloads (line 11-12) to reduce the impact of the
barrel effect. Specifically, instances of the same function
(e.g., instance-1/2 of Func-a) often keep analogous loads or
SM consumption trends. Thus, as Figure 5(b) shows, Dilu
tends to collocate the running instance-2 of Func-a with
newly launched instance-2 of Func-b, instead of conflicting
instances of Func-c. Thus, it mitigates the impact of the barrel
effect and prevents elastic scheduling failures.
Principle-2: Defragmentation through Resource Complementarity. Dilu considers both SM and memory resources to maximize GPU utilization (the SelectOptGPU function in lines 19-29). The bestScore corresponds to the GPU
with the minimum weighted fragmentation. For models that
fit within a single GPU fragment, we employ a best-fit strategy. For larger models (e.g., LLMs) that exceed a single GPU
fragment, we adopt a memory-based worst-fit strategy which
prioritizes choosing GPUs with the most remaining memory,
to minimize pipeline stages and reduce end-to-end latency.
If no GPU fragments are available, a new GPU instance will
be allocated (line 15-16).

