Medusa: Accelerating Serverless LLM Inference with Materialization

A = cudaMalloc(4096) --- i th
cudaFree(A)

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

index pointer table in the offline phase and restores the parameters with the help of the indirect index pointer table in
the online phase.

False Indirect index pointer table
positive Some_kernel parameters

A = cudaMalloc(4096) --- i+1 th

index of A <->
allocation index i

Launch_some_kernel( A )
Actual indirect index pointer: i+1
A = cudaMalloc(4096) --- i th

4.1 Indirect Index Pointers Analysis
In the offline phase, Medusa analyzes and transforms all
data pointers to their corresponding index in the allocation
sequence, i.e., indirect index pointers. To do so, Medusa
intercepts all allocation calls, and records the returned addresses. Given a data pointer in kernel parameters, Medusa
searches it in the returned addresses to find a match, and
then materializes it as the indirect index pointer.
Note that simply matching data pointers may cause false
positives. Multiple matches could be found since the buffers
could be allocated and deallocated multiple times, and the
following allocation may return the same address which is
deallocated before, resulting in a false positive as matching
the wrong indirect index.
As shown in Figure 6, in the offline phase, the 𝑖-th and
(𝑖 + 1)-th allocations return the same address ‘A’. Then,
‘some_kernel’ uses the (𝑖 + 1)-th returned address ‘A’ as
its parameter. Given the kernel’s parameter ‘A’, since there
are two matches in the allocation sequence, false positive
indirect index pointers to 𝑖 would cause data corruptions as
follows. In the online phase, since the allocation returned
address in a non-deterministic way, the 𝑖-th allocation may
differ from the (𝑖 + 1)-th allocation, i.e., ‘A’ and ‘B’ respectively. However, the false positive indirect index pointer
would restore the data pointer to the 𝑖th allocation returned
address ‘A’, resulting in data corruptions.
Trace-based indirect index pointers analysis. We observe that, although the buffers are allocated and deallocated,
the kernels would always use the allocated buffers before
they have been deallocated. So, Medusa further intercepts
the cudaLaunchKernel() to analyse along with the allocation sequence in the offline phase. With the sequence of the
allocation and cudaLaunchKernel(), Medusa matches the
pointers address of a kernel backwards from its corresponding cudaLaunchKernel(), and records the first match as the
indirect index pointers. Note that, the pointer addresses are
matched when the addresses are identical or within the range
of the allocated buffer.

Offline
Online

cudaFree(A)
B = cudaMalloc(4096) --- i+1 th
Launch_some_kernel( A )
correct: Launch_some_kernel( B )

Figure 6. A false positive example (in blue), and the correct
one (in red) in indirect index pointers substitution.

of the source node’s index and the destination node’s index, which have already been saved during the offline phase.
Medusa also accelerates KV cache initialization by restoring
the pre-saved available free GPU memory space (§6), hence
eliminating the profiling forwarding in the online phase.

4

Offline-online Cooperated Parameters
Restoration

The kernel’s parameters fall into two categories: constants
and data pointers. Constants, for example, are 4-byte integers.
Data pointers are 8-byte values that point to the buffers the
kernel accesses during execution. The constants and data
pointers can be easily distinguished, as the pointers are 8
bytes long and usually begin with a high address prefix.
However, since the high address prefix may also contain
false positive candidates (which are rare), Medusa validates
and corrects these exceptions afterwards. To validate, we run
a model forwarding and compare the outputs of the original
and speculative versions of CUDA graphs. Medusa can then
validate the speculations and report errors when the results
mismatch.
To materialize and restore constants, we directly save
their plain values, and restore them in the online phase. In
contrast, materialize and restore data pointers is non-trivial,
as the data pointers recorded in the CUDA graph node are
subject to change across different cold starts due to the nondeterministic addresses returned by malloc. Consequently,
simply using the data pointers materialized in the offline
phase would lead to invalid memory access. We observe
that, the deterministic control flow forms a strong correlation between the data pointers and the buffer allocation
sequence. We propose to use the indirect index pointers, i.e.,
the corresponding index in the allocation sequence. Medusa
employs an offline-online cooperative parameters restoration approach, which analyzes and constructs an indirect

4.2 Replaying-Based Data Pointers Restoration
In the online cold start phase, Medusa restores the data
pointers based on the indirect index pointers. The online
phase follows an identical control flow as in the offline phase,
except it eliminates CUDA graph capturing. Thus, Medusa
replays the buffer allocation (and deallocation) sequence and
records all the returned addresses. Then, for a given kernel,
Medusa leverages the indirect index pointers to obtain the
corresponding correct pointer addresses and fills them into
the CUDA graph node.

659

