Medusa: Accelerating Serverless LLM Inference with Materialization

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

For example, in vLLM [23], capturing 35 different batch sizes
accounts for 30% of the loading phase on average (Figure 2).

GPU memory used by KV cache (abbreviated as materialize KV cache initialization), and CUDA graphs in an offline
phase and restore them efficiently in the online phase, which
introduces less latency compared with dynamic profiling or
construction in the runtime.
The process of materializing the KV cache primarily involves saving and restoring the available free GPU memory
size. As for the materialization of CUDA graphs, we observe
that the model structure remains unchanged during every
cold start, resulting in a near identical CUDA graph, i.e., only
the address of the kernels and parameters may change. So
it is also applicable to materialize the CUDA graphs conceptually. However, it is nontrivial due to the low-level and
ready-to-execute nature of the CUDA graph. Specifically, the
CUDA graph records the raw pointers address of the kernel
and the parameters, which are subject to changes in every
launch, making blindly dumping and loading the memory
address space infeasible. We detail the challenges as follows.
Challenge I: Non-deterministic data pointers in parameters of CUDA graphs. The kernel parameters fall into
two categories, including the constants, e.g., 4-byte integers,
and the data pointers, e.g., the address of the input and output buffers. The constants remain unchanged in the CUDA
graph between different launches, so it is straightforward
to materialize and restore them. However, the data pointers require more sophisticated considerations since there is
no guarantee that cudaMalloc() returns the same address
across different cold starts. Such non-determinism requires
us to amend the data pointers in the restored CUDA graph
nodes to the correct address which hold the required data of
the kernel parameters.
Challenge II: Randomized and even hidden kernel address of CUDA graphs. In the offline phase, we can get a
CUDA graph after capturing and inspecting the kernel address in the graph nodes’ information. However, the address
is subject to change since the process address space is randomized in every launch. So, instead of saving the kernel
address in the offline phase, Medusa materializes the kernel’s
mangled names. During the online phase, we can load the
kernel mangled names, and traverse the symbols tables of
dynamic-link libraries to locate the corresponding kernel
address. However, it does not always work since not every
kernel is present in the symbol tables. For example, we find
that cuBLAS kernels can not be found in the symbol table of
the cuBLAS libraries.

2.4 Potential Solutions and Limitations
Hot spares are unaffordable. Existing works employ hot
spares to mitigate cold-starts [9, 51, 55]. This approach provisions a collection of ready-to-serve instances for bursty
request rates. While applicable to serverless LLM inference,
it leads to resource wastage during periods of low request
rates. Furthermore, the diversity of model types makes it
unaffordable to over-provision for every type of model.
Asynchronous execution of stages is insufficient. An intuitive approach to reduce the latency is executing different
stages simultaneously in the loading phase, thus hiding the
latency. However, a naive asynchronous execution could not
hide all the latency due to the following reasons. First, the
dependencies between different stages necessitate a ordered
execution of them. For example, the capturing stage requires
model forwarding which in turn relies on the KV cache. This
dependency mandates that the KV cache initialization stage
precede the capturing stage. Second, the model weights loading involves disk I/O, which could be executed in parallel
with the other stages, i.e., the tokenizer loading (CPU involves) and KV cache initialization (CPU + GPU involves)
stages. However, our analysis reveals that it is insufficient to
fully conceal the latencies of the two stages. As illustrated
in Figure 2, for 60% of the models, the model weights loading stage does not fully cover the combined latency of the
tokenizer loading and KV cache initialization stages1 .
Deferring the capturing stage is ineffective. Instead of
capturing all CUDA graphs for different batch sizes in the
loading phase, we could defer this process until serving inference requests. This involves running warm-up and capturing
CUDA graphs of a given batch size when serving the corresponding request batches. However, this method does not
fundamentally eliminate the capturing latency; it merely delays and disperses it across different requests in the inference
serving phase.

2.5 Our Approach and Challenges
To reduce the latency of the KV cache initialization stage
and the capturing CUDA graphs stage, we identify the long
latency is attributable to the dynamic profiling or construction in the runtime. Specifically, the KV cache initialization
acquires the available free GPU memory space through a
dynamic profiling forward; the capturing stage requires multiple model forwarding to construct the CUDA graphs. To
mitigate the overhead incurred by runtime dynamic operations, we propose to materialize the size of the available free

3

Medusa: Design Overview

To accelerate the serverless LLM inference cold start, we
propose Medusa to reduce the overhead of the KV cache
initialization and capturing CUDA graphs in the runtime by
materializing and restoring the CUDA graphs.
Medusa includes two phases: offline phase and online
phase. The goal of the offline phase is to materialize the

1 Note that the breakdown shows the vanilla time series where the loading
weights stage is synchronously executed.

657

