ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Shaoxun Zeng, Minhui Xie, Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, & Youyou Lu

a 53.0% reduction compared with vLLM. This is because
Medusa can reduce the latency of cold start, and hence
shortens the request waiting time in the pending queue,
eventually resulting in a shorter tail latency of TTFT. We
also observe similar results when changing the model to
Qwen1.5 4B.
Compared with w/o CUDA graph, Medusa achieves
lower 99th-percentile tail latency for two reasons. First, the
end-to-end cold start latency of w/o CUDA graph is longer
than Medusa. Simply removing the capturing stage fails
to achieve the same latency as Medusa’s, because the KV
cache initialization stage still accounts for a significant part.
Instead, Medusa also reduces the KV cache initialization
latency by materialization. Second, removing the CUDA
graphs results in increased latency for serving user requests,
which also hurts the tail latency.
We incrementally increase the RPS to simulate more frequent client interactions and monitor two key performance
metrics: the system’s overall serving throughput and the corresponding 99th-percentile TTFT tail latency. The results are
shown in Figure 11. Across all tested scenarios, Medusa consistently achieves the lowest tail latency compared to other
approaches. At lower request rates, the tail latency remains
relatively low for all systems, as a single inference serving
instance can adequately handle the client’s requests without
launching additional instances. As the request rate increases,
we observe a rise in tail latency across all approaches, attributed to the latency involved in launching new inference
serving instances to meet the growing demand. Medusa
outperforms the compared strategies (Figure 11(a)). When
the system’s overall serving throughput is around 4.5 QPS
with Llama2 7B, the 99th-percentile tail latency of Medusa
is 43.0%, 29.9%, and 27.0% lower than vLLM, vLLM + async,
and w/o CUDA graph, respectively. Subsequently, when the
request rate exceeds the system’s processing capacity, the tail
latency increases as the queueing time becomes dominant.

8

cases as a single 40GB A100 GPU can support Llama2 13B
or smaller models. Regarding multi-GPU support, Medusa’s
core concepts remain applicable, particularly regarding KV
cache and CUDA graph materialization. One potential future
exploration is constructing the indirect index pointer table
across multiple GPU instances. We make it future work.

9

Related Work

Serverless ML inference systems. There are lots of existing works [3, 4, 12, 24, 39, 55, 58, 59] aim to optimize
the throughput of serverless ML inference through requests
batching or scheduling. Medusa differs from these works
by concentration on reducing the overhead associated with
cold start. Phantom [14] is a recent work proposed to reduce the startup latency through fast model weights loading
and locality-driven migration. However, it overlooks two
critical stages in the cold start process: KV cache initialization stage and CUDA graph capturing stage. Medusa, in
contrast, specifically addresses and optimizes the latency of
these stages through materialization.
Optimizations for serverless cold start. A line of works [2,
15, 25, 27, 34, 40, 42, 57] focuses on speeding up the cold start
of serverless through a set of warm containers. The warm
containers have already undergone some runtime initialization, e.g., the codes or Python packages have been loaded,
which turns a cold start into a warm start, thus reducing
the latency. MITOSIS [54] argues that pre warm-up containers may not be sufficient to serve bursty requests, so
it proposes to leverage remote forking to reduce the cold
start latency. These works focus on eliminating the runtime
initialization (such as VMs or containers), instead, Medusa
focuses on the loading phase, and is orthogonal to those
of works. Optimus [19] proposes to accelerate the model
structure initialization stage by transforming an existing
model with a similar structure in warm containers. On the
other hand, Medusa focuses on optimizing other parts in
the loading phase, i.e., KV cache initialization and CUDA
graphs capturing.
Another line of works propose to accelerate cold start
through checkpoint and restore [8, 10, 13, 18, 43, 50, 52]. They
persist the complete states of a already launched instance
into storage as checkpoints, and restore the checkpoints
when a new invocation arrives. By leveraging checkpoints,
the cold start latency could be shortened since once the
restoration finished, the instance is ready to serve. Instead
of taking a full checkpoint of the instance, Medusa only
materializes the CUDA graphs and the information needed
by the KV cache initialization, which is more lightweight
and could be combined with these previous works.

Discussion

Device-side memory allocations and indirect pointers.
Memory allocations may occur within kernels (device-side),
and data pointers could be indirect, such as pointers to arrays
of pointers, complicating parameter restoration. Currently,
Medusa only intercepts allocations from host-side APIs and
handles direct pointers exclusively. Our empirical analysis of
10 models (comprising 139,364 CUDA graph nodes) revealed
no instances of device-side allocations or indirect pointers in
CUDA kernels. Despite their rarity, we maintain validation to
ensure correctness (§4). Simple solutions could be employed
to address these potential issues in future work; for example,
intercepting device-side allocations could be implemented
by adding a pass during compilation.
Multi-GPU support. Currently, Medusa supports the models that fit on a single GPU, which covers a wide range of use

10

Conclusion

This paper introduces Medusa, which mitigates cold start
latency in serverless LLM inference by materializing KV

664

