ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Shaoxun Zeng, Minhui Xie, Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, & Youyou Lu

4.3 Copy-Free Buffer Contents Restoration
Besides restoring the pointers, Medusa should also make
sure the buffer’s contents are restored correctly. The intuitive is dumping all the buffer pointed by the CUDA graph
nodes’ parameters in the offline phase and restoring them by
reading and copying in the online phase. However, saving the
buffer contents of every pointer is both expensive and unnecessary. There are two types of buffers whose contents could
be skipped from saving and restoration. First, the buffers of
model parameters contain the model weights loaded from
the storage before capturing the CUDA graphs, so there is
no need to save these buffers again. Second, the temporary
buffers are allocated to store the intermediate results between
several kernels, and would be deallocated after the relevant
kernels are finished. These temporary buffers could also
be discarded since the contents are managed by the CUDA
graph’s kernels automatically. Identifying the model parameters buffers and temporary buffers to skip their contents
restoration could greatly reduce the cost of data transfer.
Medusa identifies model parameters buffers with the
following observation: the model parameters are already
prepared before capturing the CUDA graphs. As a result,
Medusa filters the pointers of model parameters out if they
are allocated before the CUDA graphs capturing.
Medusa identifies temporary buffers by leveraging the
self-replaying characteristics of the CUDA graphs. The kernels in the CUDA graph automatically read from and write
to the buffers using recorded pointers. Consequenctly, if the
buffers are deallocated after replaying is finished, it indicates that their contents can be discarded and will not be
accessed in subsequent CUDA graph replays. This characteristic distinguishes temporary buffers from permanent buffers
used across different launches of CUDA graphs. Temporary
buffers can be identified if they are deallocated after capturing. In practice, we find that only 9.0% kernels require
permanent buffers. Each of these kernels needs two permanent buffers, with each buffer contains only 4 bytes holding
a magic number for launching. Therefore, restoring only the
contents of the permanent buffers can significantly reduce
the overhead.

5

library, then use dlsym() to get its function handler. Finally,
we use cudaGetFuncBySymbol() to load it.
Most of the kernels (e.g. 69.2% in the Llama2 13B with
the batch size of 1) can be restored in such a way. However,
there are kernels whose addresses cannot be found in the
dynamic-link library. For example, we find kernels in the
cuBLAS library can not be found by in the symbol table of
the dynamic-link libary (dlsym()). These kernels are closesource and are somehow hidden by not being shown in the
symbol tables.
Instead, we resort to another way to find their kernel address by traversing the module. The module is a set of kernels,
and the CUDA driver loads kernels in the granularity of the
module, i.e., when loading a specific kernel, the CUDA driver
would load the whole module containing the specific kernel
as well as others within the module. As a result, by traversing
a module, we can resolve multiple kernels’ addresses at a time.
Specifically, we utilize cuModuleEnumerateFunctions() to
enumerate all kernel addresses within the module. Subsequently, we employ cuFuncGetName() to retrieve each kernel’s name and compare it with the target kernel’s name.
Upon finding a match, we get the corresponding kernel’s
address and record it in the CUDA graph node for kernel
address restoration.
In order to trigger the module loading, Medusa leverages
triggering-kernels. There are some kernels within the target
module which contain the target kernels we want to resolve.
Once the triggering-kernels are executed by the CUDA driver,
they force the CUDA driver to load the module we want, and
then we can enumerate all kernels in the module and get
the target kernel address by comparing the kernel names. At
last, we fill the kernel address to the corresponding CUDA
graph nodes.

Triggering-Kernels Enhanced Kernel
Address Restoration

The goal of kernel address restoration is to fill the correct
kernel addresses into CUDA graph nodes. These kernel addresses can vary across different cold starts; therefore, Medusa
uses the kernels’ mangled names for materialization and
restoration. In the offline phase, Medusa materializes the
kernels’ mangled names and construct a mapping between
each kernel’s mangled name and its dynamic-link library. In
the online phase, given the materialized kernel’s mangled
name and its dynamic-link library, we first dlopen() the

660

5.1 Handwriting triggering-kernels
At first, we manually find triggering-kernels (usually matrix
multiplication). For example, we find a certain kind of matrix
multiplication can trigger to load the module which contains
several cuBLAS kernels in the CUDA graph nodes. This simple method works well at first. It requires less than five kernels to trigger the loading of all the modules a CUDA graph
needs. However, such human efforts become unacceptable
because, it requires finding some new trigging kernels given
different batch sizes, which makes us resort to a smarter way
to trigger the module loading.
5.2 First layer as triggering-kernels
We find that the first layer of models is inherently a triggeringkernel. Most of the LLM models are composed of multiple
structurally identical layers. For example, Llama2 13B has
40 layers, each containing the same kernels and some size
of the input and output buffers. This feature inspires us that

