ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Capturing stage
# capture the CUDA graph
graph = torch.cuda.CUDAGraph()
with torch.cuda.graph(graph):
output = model(input)

Launching &
buffer (de)allocations
Alloc
Launch kernel
Free
Alloc
Launch kernel
…

Shaoxun Zeng, Minhui Xie, Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, & Youyou Lu

Offline phase

Online phase

Analysis stage

KV cache

Indirect index pointer table

Available free
GPU memory

params idx <-> alloc idx
params idx <-> alloc idx
params idx <-> alloc idx

Replay (de)allocations
Alloc
Free
Alloc
…

Restored
CUDA graph

Offline-online Cooperated Parameters Restoration(§4)

Node info
params ptr
kernel ptr

Kernels names table

Node info

Node idx <-> kernel name
Node idx <-> kernel name
Node idx <-> kernel name

params ptr
kernel ptr

Triggering Kernels Enhanced Kernel Address Restoration (§5)

KV cache
Available free
GPU memory

Materialization of
KV Cache Initialization (§6)

Figure 5. Overview of Medusa.
KV cache initialization and CUDA graphs, and the online
phase is a cold start where Medusa restores the previously
materialized KV cache initialization and CUDA graphs instead of dynamically profiling or constructing them. Notably,
the offline phase is executed only once for each unique combination of <GPU type, model type>.
Key ideas. To overcome the indeterminacy of data pointers
in parameters (Challenge I ), we observe that, compared with
the non-deterministic nature of data pointers, the control
flow exhibits strict determinism. Each time an inference service starts, the control flow follows a strict order defined by
the user’s code – first allocate data buffers for storing the
data, e.g., the model parameters, and then launches the kernels based on the returned address of the buffers, i.e., the data
pointers. In terms of the data buffer allocations, the control
flow would also allocate each layer’s data buffers in order,
due to the layers being initialized sequentially. Such a deterministic control flow forms a strong correlation between the
data pointers and the buffer allocation sequence, i.e., the 𝑖-th
data pointer is returned by the 𝑖-th buffer allocation.
Leveraging this property, Medusa introduces an intermediate representation, called the indirect index pointer (§4.1),
which points to the index in the buffer allocation sequence.
For example, if a pointer is returned by the 𝑖th buffer allocation, its corresponding indirect index pointer is 𝑖. In the
online phase, Medusa replays the buffer (de)allocation2 sequence and restores the buffer pointers address in the CUDA
graph nodes using these indirect index pointers. Given an
indirect index pointer 𝑖, Medusa uses the address returned
by the 𝑖-th buffer allocation as the pointer and restores it to
the CUDA graph nodes. Medusa also introduces a copy-free
buffer contents restoration (§4.3) to reduce the overhead of
restoring the buffer contents.
To overcome the randomized and even hidden kernel addresses (Challenge II ), Medusa leverages triggering-kernels (§5)
to trigger the loading of kernels by forcing the CUDA driver
2 Buffer deallocation is also replayed to prevent GPU memory overflow.

658

to load their modules, which contains the kernels we need to
restore the CUDA graph. Medusa then uses the materialized
kernel’s name to traverse the modules and restore the correct
kernel address.
Workflow. As shown in Figure 5, the offline phase further
splits into two stages, capturing stage and analysis stage.
In the capturing stage, Medusa captures the CUDA graphs
via a model forwarding, during which Medusa intercepts
the kernel’s launching as well as the buffer (de)allocation sequence for further analysis. At the end of the capturing stage,
Medusa saves the CUDA graphs information including the
nodes and the dependencies. In this stage, Medusa also performs a profiling forwarding to materialize the KV cache
initialization by saving the available free GPU memory.
In the analysis stage, Medusa materializes the CUDA
graphs by synthesizing the output of the capturing stage, i.e.,
the kernels’ launching and the buffer allocation sequence, as
well as each node’s information. The analysis process finds
the correlation between the pointers of the parameters and
the corresponding index in the buffer allocation sequence,
and records such correlation in the indirect index pointer
table, which could be used in the online phase to restore
the pointers of parameters (§4). Also, Medusa uses kernels
name table to record the node’s kernel name, which could
be used to restore the kernel’s address (§5).
During the cold start (online phase), Medusa loads the materialized CUDA graphs, and restores them to the ready-toexecute ones. Medusa first replays the buffer (de)allocation
sequence and records the returned addresses. For the pointers of parameters, Medusa leverages the indirect index pointer
table to find the corresponding pointers returned by the
buffer allocations, and fills them to the CUDA graph node’s
parameters. For the kernels’ address, Medusa uses triggeringkernels to force the module loading, and leverage the kernels’
name to match the corresponding address. Worth noticing,
the dependencies could be restored with the information

