Cicero: Addressing Algorithmic and Architectural
Bottlenecks in Neural Rendering by Radiance
Warping and Memory Optimizations
Yu Feng*

Zihan Liu

Jingwen Leng

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Rochester
y-feng@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
altair.liu@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
leng-jw@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Minyi Guo

Yuhao Zhu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

University of Rochester
yzhu@rochester.edu

through Gaussian splatting [16], [42], [84]. It is conceivable
that NeRF models still have to go through a few more
iterations to mature. Thus, any system and architecture support
must address fundamental bottlenecks that are central to neural
rendering rather than artifacts of specific models.
We identify inherent bottlenecks of NeRF models both in
algorithm design and in the underlying hardware (Sec. II).
Algorithmically, a NeRF model has to compute the radiance
of millions of rays, each carrying hundreds of ray samples.
Each ray sample executes a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) inference, collectively incurring a high computational cost [55].
Architecturally, the actual computation of the MLPs introduces
irregular memory accesses, stemming from the way that ray
samples are grouped and accessed in NeRF. Consequently,
NeRF rendering results in many irregular DRAM accesses and
SRAM bank conflicts.
This paper proposes C ICERO, an algorithm-architecture
co-designed approach to tame both forms of inefficiency.
Algorithm-wise, we introduce a plug-and-play extension to
existing NeRF algorithms, fundamentally reducing the computational workload of a NeRF model (Sec. III). In particular,
we exploit radiance proximity: the radiances of nearby rays
emanating from the same physical point (radiant exitance)
are approximately the same. We propose sparse radiance
warping (S PA RW), which avoids up to 88% of the radiance
computation by reusing ray radiances computed in previous
frames. Critically, S PA RW is not a new NeRF model. Rather,
it is an extension that can be easily integrated into virtually
all existing NeRF methods, widening its applicability.
While S PA RW avoids a large portion of radiance computation, S PA RW does not completely eliminate it. Whenever
radiance computation is needed, it is bottlenecked by irregular
DRAM accesses and frequently on-chip SRAM bank conflicts.
We further propose two optimization techniques that mitigate
these memory inefficiencies in radiance computation.
To eliminate irregular DRAM accesses (Sec. IV-A), our idea
is to convert NeRF inference from a pixel-centric order to

Abstract—Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is widely seen as an
alternative to traditional physically-based rendering. However,
NeRF has not yet seen its adoption in resource-limited mobile
systems such as Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR/AR), because it is simply extremely slow. On a mobile Volta GPU, even
the state-of-the-art NeRF models generally execute only at 0.8
FPS. We show that the main performance bottlenecks are both
algorithmic and architectural. We introduce, C ICERO, to tame
both forms of inefficiencies. We first introduce two algorithms,
one fundamentally reduces the amount of work any NeRF
model has to execute, and the other eliminates irregular DRAM
accesses. We then describe an on-chip data layout strategy that
eliminates SRAM bank conflicts. A pure software implementation
of C ICERO offers an 8.0× speed-up and 7.9× energy saving over a
mobile Volta GPU. When compared to a baseline with a dedicated
DNN accelerator, our speed-up and energy reduction increase to
28.2× and 37.8×, respectively — all with minimal quality loss
(less than 1.0 dB peak signal-to-noise ratio reduction).
Index Terms—Mobile Architecture; NeRF Acceleration; VR

I. I NTRODUCTION
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [55] revives classic imagebased rendering [76], [80] using modern deep learning techniques, and has become an attractive alternative to conventional photorealistic rendering methods such as path tracing [21], [66], [69]. However, NeRF is excessively slow [55].
Despite numerous efforts [15], [39], [53], [59], [64], [79],
[87], NeRF rendering performance is still far from real-time
on mobile devices. On a mobile Volta GPU on Nvidia’s Xavier
SoC, common models like DirectVoxGO [79] merely achieve
0.8 Frame Per Second (FPS), while Instant-NGP [59] takes
over 6 s to render a 800 × 800 frame.
Accelerating NeRF models is critical, but one must not overspecialize for a specific model because of the rapid evolution in
algorithm design. Since its inception, NeRF models have gone
through several major architectural changes, from the original
grid/voxel-based design [79] to those using hierarchical data
structures [59], [87] and, more recently, point-based rendering
* Work done while at University of Rochester.

1

a memory-centric order. The pixel-centric rendering follows
the order of rays (ultimately image pixels) and their samples,
resulting in discontinuous memory accesses. The memorycentric order, in contrast, accesses voxels in the scene sequentially, inherently yielding full-streaming memory accesses.
To eliminate SRAM bank conflicts (Sec. IV-B), we explore
a new data layout strategy in on-chip SRAMs. We show that
the traditional feature-major data layout, which allocates all
the channels of a feature vector in the same SRAM bank,
necessarily introduces frequent SRAM bank conflicts. Instead,
we propose a channel-major layout, where different channels
of the same feature vector are spread across SRAM banks.
With the co-designed hardware architecture, the new data
layout can completely eliminate on-chip bank conflicts.
We integrate C ICERO with three state-of-the-art NeRF
models. A pure software implementation achieves an 8.0×
speed-up and 7.9× energy saving over a mobile Volta GPU.
Furthermore, compared to a baseline with a dedicated DNN
accelerator, our speed-up and energy reduction increase to
28.2× and 37.8×, respectively.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We introduce S PA RW, a novel algorithm that reduces up
to 88% of the MLP computations in NeRF by exploiting
radiance similarities between nearby rays.
• We propose a fully-streaming NeRF rendering algorithm
that reduces the redundant DRAM access and ensures
completely streaming DRAM accesses.
• We propose an on-chip data layout and the associated
hardware support that eliminate SRAM bank conflicts.
• We demonstrate that C ICERO achieves a 28.2× speed-up
and 37.8× energy savings over a baseline that has a dedicated DNN accelerator while maintaining less than 1.0 dB
degradation in Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR).

From offline captured images of a scene, NeRF trains a
differentiable model, which encodes the volume density and
the light field in the scene (i.e., radiance of any ray) [30], [50].
At rendering time, given the camera pose where an image is to
be rendered, the model is probed through the classic volume
rendering [41], [49] to synthesize the image.
II-B. NeRF Rendering Pipeline
We focus on MLP-based models. More recent 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) models [16], [42], [84] do away with MLPs;
they are generally faster (still far from real-time on mobile
devices) at the cost of much larger model sizes. How C ICERO
can be applied to 3DGS models will be discussed in Sec. VIII.
State-of-the-art NeRF models have a general pipeline that
consists of three stages: Indexing (I), Feature Gathering (G),
and Feature Computation (F), as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Indexing (I). The entire 3D scene is initially partitioned
into many adjacent voxels. Each voxel is a cube with eight
vertices in the space. Each vertex carries a high-dimensional
feature vector that is offline trained. During rendering, we first
generate a ray for each pixel to be rendered. Each ray samples
a set of points (e.g. S1 , S2 , and S3 in Fig. 1) along its direction.
Each ray sample, based on its sampled position in the space,
calculates the ID of the voxel that contains the sample.
Feature Gathering (G). Using the voxel ID, each ray
sample finds the eight vertices of that voxel and gathers the
features of the eight vertices. In the example in Fig. 1, S1
would access the eight vertex features in V3 . These features
encode both the density and radiance field at the corresponding
vertex locations. This ray sample then computes its feature by
trilinearly interpolating the feature vectors of the eight vertices.
Feature Computation (F). In Feature Computation,
each ray sample passes its intermediate feature through a
lightweight MLP model to obtain the actual density and
radiance value of that sample. The final color of a ray (and thus
the color of the pixel that is hit by the ray) would be computed
by accumulating all ray samples along the ray direction.

II. M OTIVATION
We begin by discussing NeRF vs. conventional rendering
methods (Sec. II-A). We then overview the general pipeline
of today’s NeRF rendering model (Sec. II-B). We then characterize NeRF algorithms to identify Feature Gathering as a
performance bottleneck (Sec. II-C). Finally, we characterize
the memory inefficiencies in Feature Gathering (Sec. II-D).

II-C. Computation Characterizations
Performance and Model Size. Today’s NeRF models are
not only slow, but they also have model sizes that do not
fit in on-chip SRAMs. Fig. 2 shows the frame rate on a
mobile Volta GPU [5] (y-axis) and model size (x-axis) of
several state-of-the-art NeRF models [15], [19], [35], [39],
[59], [79]. We also overlay the 60 FPS frame rate requirement.
NeRF algorithms rarely achieve real-time rendering on today’s
commodity mobile devices.
In addition, NeRF model sizes far exceed the on-chip
SRAM sizes affordable on today’s mobile SoC, necessitating
frequent DRAM accesses. A NeRF model’s size includes both
the feature vectors of the voxels and the MLP model weights;
the former dominates the total size. The feature vectors are
usually at the order of 10 MB – 1,000 MB, whereas the MLP
weights are generally small (10 KB – 100 KB).
Performance Bottleneck. We characterize the performance
bottlenecks across NeRF algorithms. Fig. 3 shows the execution breakdown of different stages across four popular NeRF

II-A. Why NeRF?
NeRF vs. traditional ray tracing (physically-based rendering) [69] is widely debated in graphics. Our work does not aim
to settle that debate but, rather, to contribute to that comparison
by allowing NeRF to be a more appealing option.
While NeRF is generally slower , it has two advantages
compared to ray tracing. First, NeRF promises better rendering
quality, because the complicated light-matter interactions are
learned through data using deep learning methods rather than
physically simulated. Second, ray tracing requires a more
complicated setup, e.g., modeling the geometry of the scene
and describing material properties. NeRF, in contrast, is a form
of classic image-based rendering [76], [80], which uses a set
of offline-captured images of the scene without any modeling.

2

