Triangel: A High-Performance, Accurate, Timely On-Chip Temporal
Prefetcher
Sam Ainsworth
University of Edinburgh
sam.ainsworth@ed.ac.uk

Lev Mukhanov
Queen Mary University of London
l.mukhanov@qmul.ac.uk

arXiv:2406.10627v1 [cs.AR] 15 Jun 2024

Abstract

sign complexity or silicon area. Additionally, some design
solutions result in severe performance degradation in edge
cases. We explore these to provide a foundation for a solid
baseline.
For the second question, Triage [45] already observes
that an aggressive high-degree prefetcher increases performance. We find performance can be improved further by
increasing lookahead offsets to store non-adjacent entries in
the Markov table to improve timeliness, and by using metadata formats better able to deal with the physical-address
fragmentation seen with a realistic operating system. Still,
under its highest-performance configuration, Triage’s accuracy drops to 50 percent [45], which is unviable for energyefficient cores.
We introduce Triangel, a prefetcher based on Triage that
adds several new structures to evaluate potential prefetches
before we store metadata in the Markov table, to allow high
aggression to still be efficient. We add new Samplers to
observe long-term reuse and discover whether patterns will
generate accurate prefetches. We add a Metadata Reuse
Buffer, to allow high-degree aggressive prefetching without
increasing traffic to the L3 cache, where prefetch metadata
is stored. We also replace Triage’s Bloom-filter sizing mechanism with a novel Set-Dueller, which is able to model arbitrary cache-partition configurations to find the best tradeoff
between prefetch metadata and cache hit rates.
Triangel gives 26.4% geomean speedup compared to
a baseline with stride prefetcher alone, versus 9.3% for
Triage, on the same workloads and similar core setup to
the original papers [44, 45]. It does this while being significantly more efficient, at only 10% memory-traffic increase versus 28.5% for Triage. When Triage is run more
aggressively to counteract its baseline’s low performance,
by being unconditionally degree-4 (Triangel’s maximum degree), it still only achieves 14.2% geomean speedup with
43.8% memory traffic overhead, meaning Triangel represents a Pareto improvement in both efficiency and performance against all Triage configurations.

Temporal prefetching, where correlated pairs of addresses
are logged and replayed on repeat accesses, has recently become viable in commercial designs. Arm’s latest processors include Correlating Miss Chaining prefetchers, which
store such patterns in a partition of the on-chip cache. However, the state-of-the-art on-chip temporal prefetcher in the
literature, Triage, features some design inconsistencies and
inaccuracies that pose challenges for practical implementation. We first examine and design fixes for these inconsistencies to produce an implementable baseline. We then
introduce Triangel, a prefetcher that extends Triage with
novel sampling-based methodologies to allow it to be aggressive and timely when the prefetcher is able to handle observed long-term patterns, and to avoid inaccurate
prefetches when less able to do so. Triangel gives a 26.4%
speedup compared to a baseline system with a conventional
stride prefetcher alone, compared with 9.3% for Triage at
degree 1 and 14.2% at degree 4. At the same time Triangel
only increases memory traffic by 10% relative to baseline,
versus 28.5% for Triage.

1 Introduction
The ever-growing memory wall has led to large classes of
applications becoming latency-bound on cache misses. The
solution in commercial cores has been to deploy an army of
different types of prefetcher to bring in data to the caches
before the user requests it, via prediction. Stride prefetchers [10], which predict incremental patterns in memory,
and Spatial memory streaming [36], which repeats patterns common to multiple regions of memory, have long
been commonplace, but more recently, temporal prefetchers [21, 24, 29, 44, 45], which store and replay historical sequences, have been deployed in real cores [31].
The Correlated Miss Chaining temporal prefetchers that
have been deployed [4, 5, 6, 31] store the large volume of
metadata necessary in a segment of the cache, and bear striking resemblance to Triage [44, 45], a prefetcher published
by authors from Arm and UT Austin. However, despite the
recent commercial viability of temporal prefetchers, remarkably little exploration in the literature has occurred since.
This paper seeks to ask two questions. First, is the design
of Triage [44, 45] feasible for use in real processors? Second, are there simple improvements to the design that can
significantly improve its timeliness, accuracy and/or coverage? Regarding the first question, our study suggests challenges, as certain properties of Triage are physically impossible to implement, while others are impractical due to de-

2 Background: Triage
Triage [45] is a temporal prefetcher published by authors
from UT Austin and Arm in 2019. It is an addresscorrelating Markov prefetcher [24], in that it stores (x, y) address pairs: when an L2 cache miss (or tagged prefetch hit,
when data that was prefetched into the cache is first used) to
x occurs, y is prefetched, as the recorded miss (or prefetch
hit) that occurred after x the last time it was brought into the
cache.
1

(a) Lookup-Address Example: 0xDEADBEEF looks at the 16 entries inside cache index 1, and finds a match of its hashed tag at the
blue element.

Figure 1: The basic operation of Triage [44, 45]. On a
cache miss (or tagged prefetch hit), the PC is used to index the training table. The previous address is used as an
index to train the Markov history table. The current access is then looked up in the Markov table to generate a
prefetch. Not shown: index- and target-compression mechanisms (section 3.1), confidence bits (section 3.4), partition
sizing (section 3.5).

(b) Prefetch-Target Example: the lookup-table index (LUT-idx) indirects into entry 64 of the lookup table, and the result is combined
with the 11-bit offset flag and 6 zero-bits for the cache line, to create
a full address.

Figure 2: Fields in the Markov table [24] segment of the
cache in our reimplementation of Triage [44,45]. Its lookup
address is indexed by cache set and sub-set (section 3.2, and
tagged by an XOR hash of the full address (tag-#). The
prefetch target is generated by using the LUT-idx bits as an
Triage is PC-localized, in that it separates patterns based index into the 1024-entry lookup table, which is then comon the PC that accesses the location. This manifests as a bined with the Offset and 6 zero bits for cache-line aligntraining table indexed by PC, used to store the previous mis- ment.
s/tagged hit for each PC. This training data then feeds into
a Markov table (storing historically correlated address-pairs
from the miss/prefetch-hit stream) that is not tagged by PC, either paper but sheds light on some inconsistencies and deand is stored as a variable-sized partition of the L3 cache. A sign choices.
We first cover fixes for these, choose the most appropridetailed example of its behavior is given in fig. 1.
Triage-ISR [44], published in 2022, is an extension by ate option for our baseline where no one solution is obvious,
the same authors. It changes the method of Markov-table and discuss inefficiencies, before discussing how to design
compression (section 3.1), simplifies the Markov-partition an energy-efficient, timely, accurate and high-coverage temsizing mechanism (section 3.5), and extends the Markov- poral prefetcher, Triangel, in the following section.
table format to represent groups of contiguous locations1 .
Triage has influenced temporal prefetchers in production. 3.1 Markov Metadata Format
Arm’s Correlated Miss Chaining [31] prefetcher, introduced Triage [45] and Triage-ISR [44] have very different apin the X1 and A78 onwards [16], stores and replays Markov- proaches to storing Markov-table metadata (temporally cortable pairs in a partition of the L2 cache [4, 6]. The Cortex related pairs of addresses). While Triage-ISR fixes some
X4 [40] adds another temporal prefetcher at the L1 cache.
of the implementation complexities in Triage, it introduces
other mechanisms that we believe are impossible to imple3 Fixing Inconsistencies in Triage
ment. The table we use for our Triage experiments is based
Although the original papers present an intriguing approach, on choosing the implementable parts of each, and is shown
many of the details in these papers [44, 45] are missing, in- in fig. 2.
In both original techniques, two addresses (the lookup adcomplete, and/or impossible to implement. Here we work
through the subtler details. Where it is implementable, we dress and prefetch target) are compressed to fit both within
use the most modern mechanism at the source of our base- 32 bits total. Each address is cache-line aligned, so the 6
line [44], and refer to this as “Triage” in our evaluation. least significant bits are implicit (always zero). We assume
Where ambiguity is impossible to clear up otherwise, we ref- addresses are physical, typically without loss of generality.
erence a public implementation contributed to by an author
In Triage [45], both addresses are treated identically. 11
of the original papers [30], which does not always match bits of the lookup address are stored implicitly based on the
set that is indexed during its lookup. For the prefetch target,
1 This extended format gives only a marginal speedup, and reduces cathese 11 bits are stored explicitly in the 32-bit Markov metapacity for non-sequential accesses to 3/4 of the original, extending entries
data entry. The remaining “tag” bits for each are stored as
from 32 bits to 42 bits, but achieving only 3% compression. We leave it as
10-bit
indices into a (presumably 1024-entry) lookup table.
orthogonal for this work, though we consider Triage-ISR’s other features
in Triangel.
Using the same lookup table for both causes issues, in that
2

