2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Heterogeneous Acceleration Pipeline for
Recommendation System Training
Divya Mahajan

Prashant J. Nair†



Georgia Institute of Technology

{adnan, yassaman, prashantnair}@ece.ubc.ca

divya.mahajan@gatech.edu

The University of British Columbia

Abstract—Recommendation models rely on deep learning networks and large embedding tables, resulting in computationally
and memory-intensive processes. These models are typically
trained using hybrid CPU-GPU or GPU-only conﬁgurations. The
hybrid mode combines the GPU’s neural network acceleration
with the CPUs’ memory storage and supply for embedding tables
but may incur signiﬁcant CPU-to-GPU transfer time. In contrast,
the GPU-only mode utilizes High Bandwidth Memory (HBM)
across multiple GPUs for storing embedding tables. However,
this approach is expensive and presents scaling concerns.
This paper introduces Hotline, a heterogeneous acceleration
pipeline that addresses these concerns. Hotline develops a dataaware and model-aware scheduling pipeline by leveraging the
insight that only a few embedding entries are frequently accessed
(popular). This approach utilizes CPU main memory for nonpopular embeddings and GPUs’ HBM for popular embeddings.
To achieve this, Hotline accelerator fragments a mini-batch into
popular and non-popular micro-batches (μ-batches). It gathers
the necessary working parameters for non-popular μ-batches
from the CPU, while GPUs execute popular μ-batches. The
hardware accelerator dynamically coordinates the execution of
popular embeddings on GPUs and non-popular embeddings from
the CPU’s main memory. Real-world datasets and models conﬁrm
Hotline’s effectiveness, reducing average end-to-end training time
by 2.2× compared to Intel-optimized CPU-GPU DLRM baseline.
Index Terms—Recommender Systems, Multi-Node Distributed
Training, Accelerators.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recommendation models constitute a crucial and widely
deployed class of machine learning (ML) workloads [1].
These models employ compute-intensive neural networks and
memory-intensive embedding tables to store user and item
features [2]. With the increasing number of interactions between users and items, the size of these tables is expected to
grow signiﬁcantly. Production-scale models can already reach
several terabytes and contain trillions of parameters [3–5].
The deep Learning Recommendation Model (DLRM) and
the Time-Based Sequence Model (TBSM) are popular commercial models. These models are typically trained using either
a hybrid CPU-GPU mode or a GPU-only mode [6, 7]. In the
hybrid mode (Figure 1a), the CPU provides memory capacity
for the embedding entries, while GPUs offer high-throughput
data-parallel neural network execution [8]. However, this mode
suffers from inefﬁciencies due to three reasons: (1) GPUs
rely on the CPU to provide all embeddings, (2) the low-

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00081

MLP

Embedding
Embedding
Lookup

CPU

GPUs Bottom

CPU-GPU Communication

Embeddings

†

Yassaman Ebrahimzadeh Maboud†

MLP Fwd

Top MLP
Fwd/
Bwd

All
Reduce

Embedding
Gradients

Muhammad Adnan†

Inter GPU Communication
Embedding
Update

Bottom
MLP
Bwd

All
Reduce

(a) Hybrid CPU-GPU mode
Bottom Embedding Embedding
All to All
MLP Fwd Lookup

Bottom
Top MLP
All
Embedding Embedding
All
MLP
Fwd/
Reduce
Reduce Grad all to all
Update
Bwd
Bwd

(b) GPU-only mode

Fig. 1: The execution ﬂow of a typical recommendation model
in the hybrid CPU-GPU and GPU-only. Due to their large
sizes, the embedding tables are stored and processed on CPUs.
The GPUs process the neural layers.
bandwidth CPU memory acts as a bottleneck, and (3) the
CPU’s execution of the embedding logic prevents full GPU
utilization throughout the training process.
Alternatively, the GPU-only mode, illustrated in Figure 1b,
employs multiple GPUs to store a single copy of the embeddings and trains in a model-parallel manner [9]. However,
this approach necessitates continuous all-to-all communication
between GPUs to share their embeddings. Additionally, in this
mode, one would need to grow the GPUs to enable the training
of larger datasets. For instance, the Terabyte dataset requires at
least four NVIDIA V100 GPUs to ﬁt its embeddings. Ideally,
even larger applications must be enabled using fewer GPUs.
To overcome these limitations of existing training modes,
this paper introduces a novel heterogeneous acceleration
pipeline called Hotline. The primary goal of Hotline is to fully
exploit GPUs’ compute throughput and CPU-based memory
capacity without encountering any communication or computation bottlenecks. By combining the advantages of both the
hybrid and GPU-only modes, Hotline utilizes the GPU-only
mode for the entire training process. It leverages the CPUbased main memory to store the majority of embeddings.
This is achieved through an innovative hardware accelerator that pipelines the embedding gathering operation of the
CPU together with the compute on GPUs. This approach
ensures that GPUs are continuously fed from either the CPUbased memory subsystem or their High Bandwidth Memories

1063

We evaluated Hotline with publicly available deep learning
(DLRM) and time-sequence (TBSM) based recommendation
models and compared our approach against two baselines hybrid CPU-GPU and GPU-only baseline.
We compared Hotline against state-of-the-art deep learning
frameworks such as XDL [15], FAE [10], and Intel-optimized
DLRM [16]. On average, Hotline provides 3.4× speedup over
the 4-GPU XDL, 1.4× over FAE, and 2.2× speedup over
Intel optimized DLRM. It is noteworthy that Hotline only
rearranges inputs in a single mini-batch, but the updates to
the model are performed at parity with the baseline. Thus,
Hotline does not impact the accuracy or training ﬁdelity of
the model. Hotline could train larger models, such as Criteo
Terabyte, with a single GPU, whereas the GPU-only baseline
required at least 4 GPUs to store its embeddings.

(HBM), avoiding stalls in the process. As a result, Hotline
provides a scalable throughput-optimized solution. Broadly,
the Hotline acceleration pipeline relies on two key insights.
1. Access-aware Embedding Layout in Memory: Hotline leverages the observation that real-world recommender
systems exhibit a high skew in popularity, causing certain
embedding entries to be accessed signiﬁcantly more frequently
than others [10–14]. These frequently accessed embeddings,
referred to as frequently-accessed entries, have a small memory footprint but are computationally signiﬁcant. To take
advantage of this access property, Hotline proposes an optimized access-aware memory layout for embeddings. The hardware accelerator in Hotline dynamically classiﬁes frequentlyaccessed embeddings and places them on the GPU memory,
while not-frequently-accessed embeddings are stored in the
CPU main memory. The hardware accelerator periodically
monitors the access pattern to ensure it captures the most upto-date trends in the training data.
2. Layout-aware Runtime Scheduling: Hotline employs
a dynamic runtime scheduler to achieve optimal compute
throughput with the new memory placement. This scheduler
divides a mini-batch into two micro-batches (μ-batches), and
subsequently, these μ-batches are categorized into two groups.
The ﬁrst category comprises popular inputs that exclusively
access frequently-accessed embeddings and are directly scheduled onto the GPUs. Remarkably, we ﬁnd that approximately
75% of the inputs fall into the ﬁrst category across a wide
range of models. On the other hand, the second category consists of the remaining inputs that may access both frequentlyaccessed and not-frequently-accessed embeddings. If an input
accesses even a single non-frequently-accessed embedding, it
is classiﬁed as a non-popular input. For the ﬁrst category of
popular inputs, all the required embeddings for the micro-batch
are directly scheduled onto the GPUs. In contrast, Hotline
gathers the not-frequently-accessed embeddings from the CPU
memory for the second category. However, accessing the
CPU’s main memory can stall the pipeline in such a system.
This is because the not-frequently-accessed embeddings are
stored in the CPU’s main memory and are in the critical path.
To overcome this challenge, Hotline introduces a novel
hardware accelerator that schedules the μ-batches in a dataaware and model-aware manner. By doing so, Hotline ensures
that GPUs are not starved, allowing the system to gather the
not-frequently-accessed embeddings from the CPU memory
while executing the frequently-accessed inputs on the GPUs.

II. R ECOMMENDATION S YSTEMS
Figure 2 illustrates the general structure of deep-learningbased recommendation models, which rely on two types of
inputs: dense and sparse. Dense inputs are continuous features, such as the user’s age, while sparse inputs represent
categorical features, such as the user’s location or videos
they have liked. The neural network component processes
dense inputs using Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) techniques,
while massive embedding tables handle sparse inputs. Each
embedding table represents a categorical feature, with the
number of rows corresponding to the possible items associated
with that feature. An MLP processes the outputs of both the
dense and sparse inputs to generate a prediction, such as the
likelihood of clicking or click-through rate (CTR).
A. Training Setup
Large recommender models can be trained using two distributed modes: the hybrid mode and the data-parallel mode.
In the hybrid mode, embeddings are stored and gathered on
the CPU, while neural networks are executed on GPUs in a
data-parallel manner. However, the training throughput of the
hybrid mode is often limited due to substantial data transfers
and reliance on low-bandwidth CPU main memory.
1) Hybrid CPU-GPU Mode: Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of training time across four real-world models and
datasets. The results highlight that embedding operations, such
Top
MLP

Contributions: This work makes three key contributions:
1) Identiﬁes frequently-accessed embeddings dynamically at
runtime with negligible overhead.
2) Offers a dynamic data and model-aware scheduler to
efﬁciently pipeline the mini-batch dispatch onto GPUs
while concurrently obtaining not-frequently-accessed embeddings from the main memory.
3) Offers a runtime framework that increases training
throughput by stitching the training process of the recommender model across CPUs and GPUs.

Bottom
MLP

Dense
Features

Feature Interaction
Embedding
Lookup

Embedding
Lookup

Sparse
Features

Sparse
Features

Fig. 2: General structure of a deep-learning-based recommendation model [6, 7, 17]. It consists of compute-bound neural
networks and memory-bound embedding tables.

1064

