MegIS: High-Performance, Energy-Efficient, and Low-Cost
Metagenomic Analysis with In-Storage Processing
Nika Mansouri Ghiasi1 Mohammad Sadrosadati1 Harun Mustafa1 Arvid Gollwitzer1
Can Firtina1 Julien Eudine1 Haiyu Mao1 Joël Lindegger1 Meryem Banu Cavlak1
Mohammed Alser1 Jisung Park2 Onur Mutlu1

arXiv:2406.19113v1 [cs.AR] 27 Jun 2024

1

ETH Zürich

2

POSTECH

medicine [9,10], urgent clinical settings [11], understanding microbial diversity of an environment [12, 13], discovering early
warnings of communicable diseases [14–16], and outbreak tracing [17]. The pivotal role of metagenomics, together with rapid
improvements in genome sequencing (e.g., reduced cost and
improved throughput [18]), has resulted in the fast-growing
adoption of metagenomics [10, 19, 20].
Given a metagenomic sample, a typical workflow consists of
three key steps: (i) sequencing, (ii) basecalling, and (iii) metagenomic analysis. First, sequencing extracts the genomic information of all organisms in the sample. Since current sequencing
technologies cannot process a DNA molecule as a whole, a sequencing machine generates randomly sampled, inexact fragments of genomic information, called reads. A metagenomic
sample contains organisms from several species, and during
sequencing, it is unclear what species each read comes from.
Second, basecalling converts the raw sequencer data of reads
into sequences of characters that represent the nucleotides A, C,
G, and T. Third, metagenomic analysis identifies the distribution
of different taxa (i.e., groups or categories in biological classification, such as species and genera) within a metagenomic
sample. Metagenomic analysis commonly involves the two key
tasks of determining the species present/absent in the sample
and finding their relative abundances.
To enable fast and efficient metagenomics for many critical
applications, it is essential to improve the performance and
energy efficiency of metagenomic analysis due to at least three
major reasons. First, metagenomic analysis is typically performed much more frequently compared to the other two steps
(i.e., sequencing and basecalling) in the metagenomic workflow.
While sequencing and basecalling are one-time tasks for a sample in many cases, sequenced and basecalled reads in a sample
often need to be analyzed over and over in multiple studies or at
different times in the same study [21]. Second, as shown in our
motivational analysis in §3 on a high-end server node, even
when performing the metagenomic analysis step only once for
a sample, this step bottlenecks the end-to-end performance
and energy efficiency of the workflow. Third, the performance
and energy-efficiency gaps between the metagenomic analysis
step and the other steps are expected to widen even more due
to the rapid advances in sequencing and basecalling technologies, such as significant increases in throughput and energy
efficiency of sequencing [22–27] and basecalling [28–33]. For
these reasons, simply scaling up traditional systems cannot
effectively optimize the metagenomic analysis step enough to
keep up with the rapid advances.
Metagenomic analysis suffers from significant data movement overhead because it requires accessing large amounts of
low-reuse data. Since we do not know the species present in a
metagenomic sample, metagenomic analysis requires search-

Metagenomics, the study of the genome sequences of diverse
organisms in a common environment, has led to significant advances in many fields. Since the species present in a metagenomic sample are not known in advance, metagenomic analysis commonly involves the key tasks of determining the species
present in a sample and their relative abundances. These tasks
require searching large metagenomic databases containing information on different species’ genomes. Metagenomic analysis
suffers from significant data movement overhead due to moving
large amounts of low-reuse data from the storage system to the
rest of the system. In-storage processing can be a fundamental solution for reducing this overhead. However, designing an
in-storage processing system for metagenomics is challenging
because existing approaches to metagenomic analysis cannot be
directly implemented in storage effectively due to the hardware
limitations of modern SSDs.
We propose MegIS, the first in-storage processing system designed to significantly reduce the data movement overhead of
the end-to-end metagenomic analysis pipeline. MegIS is enabled
by our lightweight design that effectively leverages and orchestrates processing inside and outside the storage system. Through
our detailed analysis of the end-to-end metagenomic analysis
pipeline and careful hardware/software co-design, we address
in-storage processing challenges for metagenomics via specialized and efficient 1) task partitioning, 2) data/computation flow
coordination, 3) storage technology-aware algorithmic optimizations, 4) data mapping, and 5) lightweight in-storage accelerators. MegIS’s design is flexible, capable of supporting different types of metagenomic input datasets, and can be integrated
into various metagenomic analysis pipelines. Our evaluation
shows that MegIS outperforms the state-of-the-art performanceand accuracy-optimized software metagenomic tools by 2.7×–
37.2× and 6.9×–100.2×, respectively, while matching the accuracy of the accuracy-optimized tool. MegIS achieves 1.5×–5.1×
speedup compared to the state-of-the-art metagenomic hardwareaccelerated (using processing-in-memory) tool, while achieving
significantly higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
Metagenomics, an increasingly important domain in bioinformatics, requires the analysis of the genome sequences of
various organisms of different species present in a common environment (e.g., human gut, soil, or oceans) [1–3]. Unlike traditional genomics [4–8] that studies genome sequences from
an individual (or a small group of individuals) of the same
known species, metagenomics deals with genome sequences
whose species are not known in advance in many cases, thereby
requiring comparisons of the target sequences against large
databases of many reference genomes. Metagenomics has led
to groundbreaking advances in many fields, such as precision
1

ing large databases (e.g., to several TBs [34–39] or more than a
hundred TBs in emerging databases [36,37]) that contain information on different organisms’ genomes. Database sizes are
expected to increase further in the future, and at a fast pace.1
Two notable reasons for this growth are 1) the rapid evolution
of viruses and bacteria [41], which necessitates frequent updates with new reference genomes [42, 43], and 2) the fact that
databases may include sequences from both highly curated
reference genomes and from less curated metagenomic sample
sets [35, 36]. Particularly, as over 99% of Earth’s microbes remain unidentified and excluded from curated reference genome
databases [44, 45], the expanded databases improve sensitivity [45]. Recent advances in the automated and scalable construction of genomic data from more organisms have further
contributed to database growth by enabling the rapid addition of new sequences to databases [46, 47]. Our motivational
analysis (§3) of the state-of-the-art metagenomic analysis tools
shows that data movement overhead from the storage system
significantly impacts their end-to-end performance. Due to its
low reuse, the data needs to move all the way from the storage
system to the main memory and processing units for its first
use, and it will likely not be used again or reused very little
during analysis. This unnecessary data movement, combined
with the low computation intensity of metagenomic analysis
and the limited I/O (input/output) bandwidth, leads to large
storage I/O overheads for metagenomic analysis.
While there has been effort in accelerating metagenomic
analysis, to our knowledge, no prior work fundamentally addresses its storage I/O overheads. Some works (e.g., [48–53])
aim to alleviate this overhead by applying sampling techniques
to reduce the database size, but they incur accuracy loss, which
is problematic for many use cases (e.g., [18, 26, 42, 54–60]). Various other works (e.g., [61–70]) accelerate other bottlenecks in
metagenomic analysis, such as computation and main memory bottlenecks. These works do not alleviate I/O overheads,
whose impact on end-to-end performance becomes even larger
(as shown in §3) when other bottlenecks are alleviated.
In-Storage Processing (ISP), i.e., processing data directly
inside the storage device where target data resides, can be a
fundamentally high-performance approach to mitigating the
data-movement bottleneck in metagenomic analysis, given
its three major benefits. First, ISP can significantly reduce
unnecessary data movement from/to the storage system by
processing large amounts of low-reuse data inside the storage
system while sending only the results to the host. Second, ISP
can leverage each SSD’s2 large internal bandwidth to access
target data without being restricted by the SSD’s relatively
smaller external bandwidth. Third, ISP alleviates the overall
execution burden of applications with low data reuse from the
rest of the system (e.g., processing units and main memory),
freeing up the host to perform other useful work instead.
Challenges of ISP. Despite the benefits of ISP, none of the
existing approaches to metagenomic analysis can be effectively
implemented as an ISP system due to the limited hardware
resources available in current storage devices. Some tools incur

a large number of random accesses to search the database
(e.g., [48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 64, 73–78]), which hinders ISP’s large
potential by preventing the full utilization of SSD internal
bandwidth. This is due to costly conflicts in internal SSD
resources (e.g., channels and NAND flash chips [79–81]) caused
by random accesses. Some tools predominantly incur more
suitable streaming accesses (e.g., [38, 52, 57, 82, 83]), but doing
so comes at the cost of more computation and main memory
capacity requirements that are challenging for ISP to meet
due to the limited hardware resources available inside SSDs.
Therefore, directly adopting either approach (with random or
streaming accesses) in ISP incurs performance, energy, and
storage device lifetime overheads.
Our goal in this work is to improve metagenomic analysis
performance by reducing the large data movement overhead
from the storage system in a cost-effective manner. To this end,
we propose MegIS, the first ISP system designed to reduce the
data movement overheads inside the end-to-end metagenomic
analysis pipeline. The key idea of MegIS is to enable cooperative ISP for metagenomics, where we do not solely focus on
processing inside the storage system but, instead, we capitalize on the strengths of processing both inside and outside the
storage system. We enable cooperative ISP via a synergistic
hardware/software co-design between the storage system and
the host system.
Key Mechanism. We design MegIS as an efficient pipeline
between the SSD and the host system to (i) leverage and (ii) orchestrate the capabilities of both. Based on our rigorous analysis of the end-to-end metagenomic analysis pipeline, we propose a new hardware/software co-designed accelerator framework that consists of five aspects. First, we partition and map
different parts of the metagenomic analysis pipeline to the host
and the ISP system such that each part is executed on the most
suitable architecture. Second, we coordinate the data/computation flow between the host and the SSD such that MegIS
(i) completely overlaps the data transfer time between them
with computation time to reduce the communication overhead between different parts, (ii) leverages SSD bandwidth
efficiently, and (iii) does not require large DRAM inside the
SSD or a large number of writes to the flash chips. Third,
we devise storage technology-aware metagenomics algorithm
optimizations to enable efficient access patterns to the SSD.
Fourth, we design lightweight in-storage accelerators to perform MegIS’s ISP functionalities while minimizing the required
SRAM/DRAM buffer spaces inside the SSD. Fifth, we design
an efficient data mapping scheme and Flash Translation Layer
(FTL) specialized to the characteristics of metagenomic analysis to leverage the SSD’s full internal bandwidth.
Key Results. We evaluate MegIS with two different
SSD configurations (performance-optimized [84] and costoptimized [85]). We compare MegIS against three state-of-theart software and hardware-accelerated metagenomics tools:
(i) Kraken2 [49], which is optimized for performance, (ii) Metalign [82], which is optimized for accuracy, and (iii) a stateof-the-art processing-in-memory accelerator, Sieve [64], integrated into Kraken2 to accelerate its k-mer matching. By
analyzing end-to-end performance, we show that MegIS provides 2.7–37.2× and 1.5–5.1× speedup compared to Kraken2
and Sieve, respectively, while achieving significantly higher
accuracy. MegIS provides 6.9–100.2× speedup compared to

1 For example, based on recently published trends, the ENA assembled/annotated sequence database size currently doubles every 19.9 months [25], and
the BLAST nt database size doubled from 2021 to 2022 [40].
2 In this work, we focus on the predominant NAND flash-based SSD
technology [71, 72]. We expect that our insights and designs would benefit
storage systems built with other emerging technologies.

2

