(MC)2: Lazy MemCopy at the Memory Controller
Aditya K Kamath

Simon Peter

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
akkamath@cs.washington.edu

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
simpeter@cs.washington.edu

Abstract—(MC)2 is a lazy memory copy mechanism which can
be used within memcpy-like functions to significantly reduce the
CPU overhead for copies that are sparsely accessed. It can also
hide copy latencies by enhancing the CPU’s ability to execute
them asynchronously. (MC)2 ’s lazy memcpy avoids copying data
at the time of invocation. Instead, (MC)2 tracks prospective
copies. If copied data is later accessed by a CPU or the cache,
(MC)2 uses the tracking information to lazily execute a copy,
when necessary. Placing (MC)2 at the memory controller puts
it at the perfect vantage point to eliminate the largest source of
memcpy overhead—CPU stalls due to cache misses in the critical
path—while imposing minimal overhead itself.
(MC)2 consists of three main components: memory controller
extensions that implement a lazy memcpy operation, a new
instruction exposing the lazy memcpy, and a flexible software
wrapper with semantics identical to memcpy. We implement
and evaluate (MC)2 in the gem5 simulator using a variety of
microbenchmarks and workloads, including Google’s Protobuf,
where (MC)2 provides a 43% speedup and Linux huge page
copy-on-write faults, where (MC)2 provides 250× lower latency.
Index Terms—lazy copy, memcpy, data transfer, memory
controller, memory, DRAM

Common use cases of memory copies are for temporary
buffers. Consider serialization and deserialization mechanisms
used to transfer objects across processes and servers [2, 3, 53].
During serialization, a process converts an object into a bytestream and sends it to another process. The receiving process
then deserializes this stream, transforming it back into an object.
Both serialization and deserialization can involve many data
copy operations as data is moved between the object and the
byte-stream. Databases with multi-version concurrency control
(MVCC) often use a form of read-copy-update to maintain
transactional isolation [58]. Here, the transaction duplicates
data it wishes to modify. Modifications happen locally and
the duplicate is merged into the database during the commit
stage. Copies are also common in operating systems, such
as for many IO system calls, for memory defragmentation,
and for the fork system call. In many of these cases, only a
fraction of each copy may be accessed or modified, making
the remainder redundant. Further, many accesses occur with a
time delay and do not require eager execution of the copy.
A variety of techniques to reduce the overhead of copies have
I. I NTRODUCTION
been proposed [43, 44, 55, 61]. For example, Demikernel [61]
Memory copies significantly impact the execution latency adds zero-copy APIs to IO stacks, along with programming
and computational overhead of modern applications. Profiling language based object ownership tracking features. zIO [49]
of Google’s datacenters shows that more than 5% of CPU cycles reduces copy overheads in the IO stack without API changes by
are consumed by memory copy (memcpy / memmove) opera- unmapping copied pages and marking these memory locations
tions [25, 47], a substantial overhead at that scale. Additionally, as copy-on-access. When a copy is not accessed, the copy
waiting for copy completion adds “killer microseconds” [5] to latency is saved. Only accessed memory pages incur the copy
application processing which aren’t hidden by classical means overhead upon first access. Unfortunately, existing techniques
like out-of-order processing. As we will see in §II-C, most have drawbacks. Zero-copy APIs require significant program
CPU cycles for memcpy are spent stalled, waiting for memory. redesign to use efficiently. Existing transparent approaches,
CPU memory access latency is not expected to improve in such as zIO, have high page remapping overheads and thus
the future due to the classic “memory wall” problem, where only provide benefits for large (>16KB) copies of which only
technological advances improve clock speeds for CPUs, while a small fraction (≤25%) is accessed, with high performance
memory latencies remain largely stagnant [7]. For example, penalties when this is not the case. Hardware offload techniques,
DDR5 improves memory bandwidth by up to 2× over DDR4 such as DMA engines, have high startup overheads making
at a slight memory access latency cost [12]. In fact, memory them similarly impractical for smaller copies [52].
latencies may worsen in the future as cloud providers add higher
To alleviate the drawbacks of prior approaches, our proposal
capacity memories at the expense of latency [17, 21, 32, 35]. relies on lazy execution of each memory copy. Laziness
is a common technique used across different domains in
This work was supported by NSF grants 2212580 and 2212193.
computer science. When an expensive operation is requested,
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, laziness delays the operation until time of use. For example,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
functional languages [20] use it to allow declaration of infinitely
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. sized data structures that consume limited memory—only
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00084
upon data access are the operations resolved and memory

1

is allocated. Operating systems use copy-on-write [48] to avoid
performing copies until pages are modified. Laziness provides
the advantage that penalties are paid only upon use.
Recent advances in memory and processing logic have
allowed significant compute logic to be placed near memory
modules, such as within the memory controller [39]. Prior
work has taken advantage of this to integrate tasks such as
encryption [36], data address remapping [62], or logging [59]
within the memory controller. As all memory accesses are
marshaled by the memory controller, we believe it is the ideal
place to improve data copying mechanisms.

Core

Core

Core

CU/ALU

CU/ALU

CU/ALU

TLB Private $

TLB Private $

TLB Private $

Last-level $
Interconnect
Memory
controller

Memory
controller

Memory
module

Memory
module

Fig. 1: Base memory system architecture.

We propose performing Memory Copies lazily at the Memory
Controller, i.e., (MC)2 . (MC)2 augments the memory controller
to allow programmers to issue a lazy memcpy operation on a
source and destination buffer. When any CPU or cache writes
to the source buffer or reads from the destination buffer, the
memory controller performs the copy lazily. At all times, data
appears to the program as if it had been copied eagerly. (MC)2
allows applications to avoid the latency of copying in the critical
path while only exhibiting overheads for copied data that ends
up accessed. (MC)2 also provides the CPU further opportunities
to hide copy latencies through prefetching, accelerating copies
even in cases where most data is accessed.

II. BACKGROUND
We begin by describing the operation of memory copies
down to the hardware architectural level (§II-A). We then look
at how and why different types of applications make frequent
use of memory copies (§II-B). Finally, we look at the overhead
of copying in these applications and determine the hardware
architectural source of the overhead (§II-C).
A. Memory copy operation

Memory copies (memcpys) are used to transfer a given size
of data from a source buffer to a destination buffer. These
(MC)2 enhances the memory controller with a Copy Tracking buffers do not overlap. There are four principal operations
Table (CTT) containing details of prospective copies to be involved in a memcpy: load, store, test, and loop [47]. The load
performed lazily. On a memcpy, instead of performing the fetches data from the source buffer, the store places it into the
copy, a new CPU instruction sends a message to the memory destination buffer. The test operation checks whether the current
controller with the source address, destination address, and copied size matches the provided size. If not, the loop operation
copy size which are inserted as an entry in the CTT. When restarts the process for the next iteration. Optimizations to
a destination cacheline is read from or a source cacheline is memcpy typically involve taking advantage of CPU instructions
written to, the memory controller consults the CTT, reads the that support data movement at larger granularity for higher
source cacheline from memory, then copies it to the destination, throughput, such as SIMD instructions [9, 26].
While out-of-order and speculative execution allow for some
i.e., a lazy copy is performed. On a destination cacheline write,
parallelism among iterations of copying, prior work [23] has
the CTT entries are modified to stop tracking the cacheline.
found that this is largely limited. As the number of copy loop
In summary, we make the following contributions:
iterations being performed increases, the CPU reorder buffer
2
quickly fills, forcing further iterations to wait. This brings
• We propose a new hardware system, (MC) that supports
lazy memcpy operations. Programmers may use (MC)2 via memory access latencies into the critical path of the copy, an
a set of new instructions, a memcpy_lazy C function, effect we will quantify in §II-C.
or transparently via a dynamic link library that replaces Memory system effect on memcpy: First, to clearly understand how the memory system affects memcpy overhead, we
the standard C library memcpy function.
2
• We implement and evaluate (MC) in the gem5 [6] cycle- briefly describe common memory system hardware architecture,
accurate simulator. (MC)2 has only ∼0.2% area overhead shown in Figure 1. It consists of a set of CPU cores, each
with their own private cache and a shared last-level cache
and a bank leakage power of 33.8 mW.
2
brings for (LLC). The system also contains a set of memory modules
• We demonstrate the improvement (MC)
server-class workloads, with the Protobuf [19] benchmark with memory controllers responsible for issuing operations to
showing 43% lower runtime, MongoDB’s [38] insert them. An interconnect connects the memory controllers to the
operations showing 16% lower latency, and Cicada’s [34] CPU cores via the caches.
For memory read operations, the system first probes the
transactions having up to 78% higher throughput. (MC)2
also accelerates common OS operations, like huge page CPU’s private cache and the shared LLC to locate the requested
copy-on-write faults that have up to 250× lower latency, data. If unsuccessful, the system transmits the access via the
and IO buffer copies with up to 99% higher throughput. memory interconnect to the appropriate memory controller.
This controller then sends a request to the memory module
We have made our code available at https://github.com/ and, upon retrieval, forwards the data to the core via the caches.
AKKamath/MCSquare-ISCA24 to aid further research.
In contrast, write operations typically involve a direct write

2

