The Dataflow Abstract Machine Simulator Framework
Nathan Zhang

Rubens Lacouture

Gina Sohn

Paul Mure

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
stanfurd@stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
rubensl@stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
ginasohn@stanford.edu

MIT
Cambridge, USA
paulmure@mit.edu

Qizheng Zhang

Fredrik Kjolstad

Kunle Olukotun

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
qizhengz@stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
kjolstad@stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
kunle@stanford.edu

For well-understood ISA-based systems, such as multicore CPUs, simulators such as ZSim, SlackSim, Graphite,
and gem5 provide trade-offs between accuracy and performance [12], [38], [40], [50]. However, this is not the case
for general dataflow systems; programming models, hardware
architectures, memory configurations, and even the functionality of individual blocks are constantly in flux.
The state of the art framework for parallel heterogeneous
system simulation is the Structural Simulation Toolkit (SST)
[49]. However, its programming interface does not model finegrained channel behaviors, and its runtime scales poorly when
simulating tightly-coupled systems. At the heart of this scaling
challenge is the traditional event-driven event-queue execution
scheme, which results in a runtime whose synchronization
overhead increases with both increasing numbers of simulation
workers as well as decreasing communication latency. This
lack of scalability is particularly important as the number of
cores in a single machine has increased dramatically over
the years. In 2011, when the Structural Simulation Toolkit
was published, the largest server contained four Intel E54650 CPUs with 32 cores / 64 hyperthreads total, while today
a server can contain up to eight Intel Xeon 8490H CPUs
totalling 480 cores / 960 hyperthreads.
To fill the need for high-performance, scalable, and flexible
dataflow simulation, we present three contributions:
1) A Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP)-based
programming interface for describing the functionality
of components (Section III)
2) Asynchronous distributed time and two efficient localonly synchronization algorithms, enabling event-queuefree execution (Section IV)
3) Time-bridging channels which decouple execution of
tightly coupled units while capturing fine-grained channel behaviors (Section V)
Using these ideas, we implement the Dataflow Abstract Machine (DAM) simulator framework with the aim of providing
a tool for exploring novel ideas in dataflow systems.1 DAM is
an exact, deterministic system, producing the same results on

Abstract—The growing interest in novel dataflow architectures
and streaming execution paradigms has created the need for a
simulator optimized for modeling dataflow systems.
To fill this need, we present three new techniques that make it
feasible to simulate complex systems consisting of thousands of
components. First, we introduce an interface based on Communicating Sequential Processes which allows users to simultaneously
describe functional and timing characteristics. Second, we introduce a scalable point-to-point synchronization scheme that avoids
global synchronization. Finally, we demonstrate a technique to
exploit slack in the simulated system, such as FIFOs, to increase
simulation parallelism.
We implement these techniques in the Dataflow Abstract
Machine (DAM), a parallel simulator framework for dataflow
systems. We demonstrate the benefits of using DAM by highlighting three case studies using the framework. First, we use
DAM directly as an exploration tool for streaming algorithms on
dataflow hardware. We simulate two different implementations
of the attention algorithm used in large language models, and
use DAM to show that the second implementation only requires
a constant amount of local memory. Second, we re-implement
a simulator for a sparse tensor algebra accelerator, resulting in
57% less code and a simulation speedup of up to four orders of
magnitude. Finally, we demonstrate a general technique for timemultiplexing real hardware to simulate multiple virtual copies of
the hardware using DAM.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern applications such as large language models (LLMs),
data analytics, and sparse machine learning have ignited a
flurry of research in both dataflow architectures, such as
Reconfigurable Dataflow Accelerators (RDAs) and CoarseGrained Reconfigurable Arrays (CGRAs) [9], [16], [26], [42],
[43], [45], [47], and streaming abstractions such as the Sparse
Abstract Machine [29]. To explore the functional behavior
and performance characteristics of their proposed dataflow
systems, many researchers develop bespoke simulators.
To simulate dataflow systems, a framework must (1) support
communication among thousands of coupled units, (2) model
fine-grained channel behaviors, and (3) simulate heterogenous
user-defined models. Furthermore, the scale of these systems
demands efficient parallelization. Providing these properties in
sequential simulation is straightforward; however, no efficient
method exists for parallel simulation.

1 DAM is available on Github at https://github.com/stanford-ppl/DAM-RS.

1

each execution. To demonstrate the broad applicability of this
framework, we include three case studies on projects built on
top of DAM.
First, we perform an algorithm-level exploration of streaming algorithms for computing attention – the key operation
underpinning LLMs. Using an abstract dataflow hardware
model [51], we characterized the interplay between the algorithms, their local memory usage, and end-to-end performance.
Second, we re-implement an existing functional simulator
for a sparse tensor algebra accelerator, using 57% less code
and achieving a geomean speedup of 594×. Additionally, we
were able to evaluate designs whose complexity and scale
were previously deemed infeasible (terminated after two days)
in minutes. Leveraging the increased performance of our
new simulator, we then calibrated the simulator against real
hardware by evaluating thousands of possible timing behaviors
using Opentuner [3].
Third, we demonstrate a general technique for timemultiplexing real hardware to simulate multiple pieces of
hardware using DAM. This is particularly important for cosimulating systems in which large quantities of physical components are difficult to obtain. For example, an academic tapeout generally only yields a small handful of chips. As a proof
of concept, we simulate execution of 1024 GPUs running
PyTorch models on four physical GPUs [46], and show that
the multiplexing system does not introduce significant error
when taking real measurements.

In order to support simulation, we augment the CSP model
with local time (CSPT). Each context owns a local monotonic
notion of simulated time — the context may step forward
in time whenever it would like, and as far as it would like,
but cannot step backwards. As illustrated in Listing 1, our
model is nearly identical to CSP with the addition of local
time annotations on lines 9, 18, and 19.
Contexts may view other contexts’ times to obtain a lower
bound on the viewed contexts’ simulated progress, or to wait
until a viewed context has reached a certain point in simulated
time. This feature facilitates the implementation of complex
logical units as a combination of several simpler contexts.
Finally, contexts communicate through channels, which
connect a sender context and a receiver context. Channels are
statically-connected, can optionally be bounded, and automatically handle the simulation of events such as backpressure
and starvation. In the merge unit example, the operations on
lines 7, 8, 12, 15, and 18 implicitly update the context’s time
as necessary. Channels do not inherently possess a notion of
time and instead bridge between their sender and receiver time
zones; this is necessary to decouple the sender and receiver
contexts in order to enable parallel execution.
To highlight the qualitative differences between our proposed CSPT scheme and event-driven (ED) schemes, we
present two pseudocode implementations of a merge unit in
Listing 1 and Listing 2. Both of these modeled units operate
with a two-cycle initiation interval and a six-cycle latency.
The comparison highlights key advantages of CSPT over
ED. First, ED is more verbose than CSPT due to needing
dedicated code to align events on the two incoming channels
(Listing 2 lines 18–20). Second, event handlers are not allowed
to reject events, and the ED unit must therefore store events
into a local queue and process them later (Listing 2 lines
3–15). Importantly, this means that the ED implementation
cannot simulate backpressure as all channels are effectively
unbounded.

II. E XISTING S IMULATION E NVIRONMENTS
There are two primary aspects to a simulator framework:
its user-facing interface and its underlying runtime. General
purpose simulation frameworks such as the Structural Simulation Toolkit [49] and YACSIM [31] expose an event-driven
interface, and use some form of ordered event queue [1].
The poor scalability of event queues is well known; many
specialized simulators such as ZSim [50], SlackSim [12], and
Graphite [40] circumvent this problem by using less precise
methods, leveraging domain knowledge to trade accuracy for
speed. However, due to the domain knowledge required, these
are unsuitable for a general purpose simulator framework.
With an event-driven interface, components register event
handlers with the framework. These handlers are then invoked
by the framework as events arise. While simpler from the
framework’s perspective, this makes modelling objects with
complex internal state difficult as handlers may be invoked at
any time by the framework.

IV. A SYNCHRONOUS D ISTRIBUTED T IME
The CSPT interface presents the user with a local notion
of time when describing each component, which becomes
a distributed notion of time when combining contexts and
channels into a simulated system.
By using local time, the CSPT interface allows our runtime
to avoid any notion of global time. As a result, DAM is
entirely event-queue-free. Instead, our system relies on two
lazy pairwise synchronization mechanisms that are triggered
only as needed (Fig. 1). This allows contexts to execute far
into the future relative to each other, a property that we call
asynchronous distributed time. In our sparse tensor algebra
accelerator case study in Section VIII, we have observed
contexts that are thousands of cycles apart. This in turn
provides the decoupling necessary to achieve high efficiency
on modern multicore systems.

III. U SER -FACING I NTERFACE
Our dataflow simulator implementation framework exposes
three constructs to users: contexts, time, and channels.
Work as early as the 1970s recognized that communicating
sequential processes (CSP) [28] is a natural interface for
programming dataflow systems [11]. We find that the converse
is also true — the description of dataflow systems naturally
maps to the CSP paradigm. Furthermore, this approach exposes abundant parallelism, as processes execute in a largely
independent manner.

2

