The Maya Cache: A Storage-efficient and Secure
Fully-associative Last-level Cache
Anubhav Bhatla*

Navneet*

Biswabandan Panda

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai, India
bhatlaanubhav2001@gmail.com

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai, India
krnavneet13@gmail.com

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai, India
biswa@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract—The last-level cache is vulnerable to cross-core
conflict-based attacks as the cache is shared among multiple
cores. A fully associative last-level cache with a random replacement policy can mitigate these attacks. However, it is impractical
to design a large last-level cache that is fully associative. One
of the recent works, named Mirage, provides an illusion of
a fully associative cache with a decoupled tag and data store
and a random replacement policy. However, it incurs a storage
overhead of 20%, static power overhead of 18.16%, and area
overhead of 6.86% compared to a non-secure baseline cache of
16MB. One of the primary contributors to the additional storage
requirements is the usage of extra invalid tag entries that are
used in a skewed way without changing the number of data
store entries. These invalid tag entries provide a strong security
guarantee. We observe that more than 80% of last-level cache’s
data store entries are dead on arrival, providing negligible utility
in terms of performance improvement as they do not get reused
in their lifetimes. Also, in general, the data store entries occupy
≈ eight times more storage than tag store entries. Based on
these observations, we propose Maya, a storage efficient and
yet secure last-level randomized cache that compensates for the
additional storage of tag store entries by using fewer data store
entries. Maya increases the tag store entries for security and reuse
detection and uses fewer data store entries that only store the
reused data. Our proposal provides a strong security guarantee,
which is one set-associative eviction in 1032 line fills at the lastlevel cache. This is equivalent to a line installed once in 1016
years to mount an eviction attack. Maya provides this security
guarantee with a 12MB data store that occupies 28.11% less
area and 5.46% less static power when compared to a non-secure
baseline of 16MB cache.
Index Terms—Cache, Security, Performance

I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern processors use multiple levels of caches to hide
the long latency main memory accesses. Typically, the level-1
and level-2 (L1 and L2) caches are private to the core, and the
last-level cache (LLC) is shared across all the cores. Crosscore eviction-based side-channel attacks [22] [17] can cause
controlled contention at the LLC sets and later can observe
the effect of contention by measuring the latency differences
between an LLC hit and an LLC miss. Randomized LLC
designs are a promising approach to mitigate contention-based
cache attacks. Randomized LLCs like CEASER, CEASER-S,
Scatter-Cache [26], [27], [36] randomize the address to cache
set mapping. However, these designs are prone to probabilistic
*Both authors contributed equally

cache contention attacks and are not secure [7], [12], [24].
The recently proposed SassCache [14] incurs a significant
performance slowdown of more than 4% when evaluated on
all the memory-intensive SPEC CPU2017 [2] and GAP [4]
homogeneous mixes on an 8-core system.
Mirage [29] is a randomized LLC that provides the illusion
of a fully associative cache, and it uses a random replacement
policy so that an attacker cannot gather any information about
a cache line address. Mirage is motivated by the V-way
cache [25] and retains the practical set-associative lookups
by decoupling placement and replacement from tag store to
data store. Mirage uses a set-associative tag-store that overprovisions invalid tags in sets and with load balancing that
guarantees new addresses are always filled into invalid tags
without causing any conflicts. Cache fills result in global
evictions, where a replacement candidate is selected randomly
from the entire cache. Mirage guarantees global replacement of
cache lines for the lifetime of a computer system; eliminating
conflict-based attacks. Note that Mirage does not mitigate
occupancy attacks and even a fully associative cache is prone
to occupancy attacks [32].
The Problem. Mirage provides the illusion of a fully associative LLC, incurs a marginal performance overhead, and hence
provides a sweet spot in terms of security and performance.
However, it incurs an additional storage of 20% at the LLC
with a static power overhead of 18.16%, which is a costly
tradeoff. For example, for an 8-core system with 16MB
baseline LLC, the combined storage of tag store and data
store is 16.91 MB, whereas Mirage has a storage requirement
of 20.31 MB. This additional storage requirement leads to
an increase in static power consumption, from 622mW with
the baseline 16MB LLC to 735mW with the Mirage cache.
The requirement increases significantly for a large LLC. For
a 32-core system with 32 2MB LLC slices, the baseline LLC
requires a storage of 67.63MB of tag store plus data store,
whereas Mirage requires a storage of 81.25MB LLC space,
an additional 13.62MB LLC, which is extremely high.
Our goal is to propose an LLC design that can provide the
illusion of a fully associative cache and, hence, the security
guarantee without significant storage, power, and performance
overhead. Note that one can argue for reducing the overall
capacity of the Mirage cache and getting storage overhead
similar to the baseline. According to our simulations, this

% of dead blocks

100

BASELINE

MIRAGE

80
60

40
20
0

Fig. 1. Percentage of dead blocks inserted into the LLC for 15 memory intensive SPEC CPU2017 [2] benchmarks and five GAP [4] benchmarks on a
single core system with a 2MB baseline and Mirage LLCs. The dead block percentage for a given benchmark is the average of dead blocks across all the
sim-points [2], [4] of a benchmark.

approach leads to an average performance slowdown of around
5%. This slowdown is high as the micro-architecture community has been pushing the LLC performance for the last two
decades to achieve performance closer to Belady’s policy [31].
Our observations. Mirage increases the tag entries and provides extra tags in the form of invalid tags to provide security.
However, it does not change the data store entries, leading to
additional storage requirements. Figure 1 shows the fraction
of data store entries that are dead (not reused after they are
installed into the LLC) with the baseline cache and the Mirage
for SPEC CPU2017 [2] and GAP [4] benchmarks. On average,
more than 80% of the data entries are dead, occupying the LLC
data store. This insight is not new and is well-established in
the micro-architecture community.
Our approach. We propose Maya, a secure and storageefficient randomized LLC that provides the illusion of a fully
associative LLC. Maya uses a smaller data store compared
to the baseline, with additional tag entries for security and
tracking reuse to avoid any performance overhead due to the
reduced data store size. In general, data store entries occupy
eight times more storage than tag store entries. So, we can get
the maximum benefit in terms of storage neutrality (compared
to a non-secure LLC) if we optimize for the data store entries.
Second, as most of the data is dead on arrival, these data-store
entries are expendable. So, if we can use the extra tags to
manage the remainder of the data store intelligently, it is a winwin tradeoff in terms of security, performance, and storage.
The core idea of Maya is motivated by the Reuse Cache
[5], where we install a cache line in the data store only after
it gets a reuse. To detect the reuse behavior, it uses additional
tag-only entries (on top of invalid tag entries) that monitor the
reuse behavior, and then on reuse, a data entry is allocated.
Maya uses a decoupled tag and data store design. In general,
we observe that the Maya cache provides a similar security
guarantee as Mirage because the ratio of valid tags to invalid
tags at the tag store is similar to Mirage’s ratio of valid to
invalid tags. For shared memory attacks, the LLC fills are
isolated by their respective security domain ID. Overall, we
make the following contributions:
(i) We propose Maya, a secure, fully associative, and random-

ized LLC, which is storage-efficient. The crux of our proposal
is a decoupled tag and data store with additional tag entries
but fewer data entries (Section III).
(ii) We argue about the security guarantee of Maya in terms
of the number of LLC line installs required to mount an
eviction-based attack. We prove that such an attacker must
perform more than 1032 LLC line installs (around 1016 years,
assuming one LLC fill takes an optimistic one ns.) to get
one set-associative eviction, which is larger than the system
lifetime (Section IV).
(iii) Maya provides a strong security guarantee without additional storage (storage savings of 2%). Maya saves the LLC
area by 28.11%, and leakage power by 5.46% (Section V).
II. BACKGROUND
Threat model. The attacker can mount all the possible
LLC contention attacks that exploit a timing channel, such
as eviction-based and flush-based attacks. She is not capable
of mounting cache occupancy-based attacks. For eviction and
occupancy-based attacks, she is not restricted by time to form
an eviction set and then attack the victim.
A. LLC Contention Attacks
Eviction-based cache attacks. In eviction-based attacks,
an attacker fills its data into an LLC that conflicts with the
victim’s data. Later, in the Probe step, the attacker re-accesses
its data, and if it observes longer latency, then it means that
the victim has evicted some of the attacker’s lines [22].
Shared memory-based attacks. In a shared memory-based
attack (like Flush+Reload [38]), an attacker shares its address
space with the victim (e.g., shared libraries). The attacker
flushes cache lines shared by both the attacker and the victim
and observes the victim’s access to the same cache lines by
observing memory access latency.
Occupancy-based attacks. An LLC occupancy-based attacker
observes the LLC space occupied by the victim application.
Recent attacks on website fingerprinting [32] exploit the
dynamic LLC usage between the attacker and the victim. Note
that an occupancy-based attack is possible even with a fully
associative cache.

