arXiv:2406.06955v1 [cs.DC] 11 Jun 2024

ElasticRec: A Microservice-based Model Serving Architecture
Enabling Elastic Resource Scaling for Recommendation Models
Yujeong Choi

Jiin Kim

Minsoo Rhu

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
yjchoi0606@kaist.ac.kr

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
jiin.kim@kaist.ac.kr

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
mrhu@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract—With the increasing popularity of recommendation
systems (RecSys), the demand for compute resources in datacenters has surged. However, the model-wise resource allocation
employed in current RecSys model serving architectures falls
short in effectively utilizing resources, leading to sub-optimal
total cost of ownership. We propose ElasticRec, a model serving
architecture for RecSys providing resource elasticity and high
memory efficiency. ElasticRec is based on a microservice-based
software architecture for fine-grained resource allocation, tailored
to the heterogeneous resource demands of RecSys. Additionally,
ElasticRec achieves high memory efficiency via our utility-based
resource allocation. Overall, ElasticRec achieves an average 3.3×
reduction in memory allocation size and 8.1× increase in memory
utility, resulting in an average 1.6× reduction in deployment cost
compared to state-of-the-art RecSys inference serving system.
Index Terms—Machine learning, recommendation model, resource management, resource scaling, microservice, model deployment

I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural network (DNN) based recommendation system (RecSys) accounts for a significant portion of machine
learning (ML) inference cycles in modern datacenters (75%
in Meta [20], 25% in Google [24]). These latency-critical
ML services operate with stringent service level agreement
(SLA) goals on tail latency, so maximizing latency-bounded
throughput (i.e., number of service queries processed per
second that meets SLA, aka QPS) becomes critical.
To serve billions of service queries around the world,
datacenters replicate a large fleet of inference servers, each
server replica provisioned with its own copy of the entire
model parameters [18], [20], [28], [46]. Such baseline “modelwise” resource allocation enables each server replica to independently service user queries, which helps utilize querylevel parallelism across the fleet and improve QPS. However,
a critical limitation of model-wise resource allocation is that
the way resources are allocated does not consider how well it
is actually utilized, leading to significant waste in resources.
This work identifies two key reasons behind the baseline’s
sub-optimal resource allocation:
1) Heterogeneous resource demands of sparse and dense
layers in RecSys. Modern RecSys combines sparse
embedding layers with dense DNN layers, each layer
This is the author preprint version of the work. The authoritative version will
appear in the Proceedings of the 51st IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA-51), 2024.

exhibiting notable differences in their compute and
memory characteristics. Consequently, the QPS of a
dense DNN layer and sparse embedding layer becomes
uneven (i.e., one layer type typically shows much
lower QPS than the othey layer type), rendering the
low-performance layer to bottleneck the overall QPS
(Section III-A). To maximize end-to-end model-wise
throughput, an optimal resource allocation would have
more compute resources provisioned just to the bottlenecked layer. Unfortunately, the baseline model-wise
resource allocation treats the entire RecSys model as
one monolithic unit for allocating resources. As such,
it is challenging to selectively provision more resources
to only a subset of model layer(s), failing to satisfy the
unique resource demands of each layer independently.
2) Sparse embedding table accesses and its skewed
access distribution. The embedding tables employed in
sparse embedding layers are memory capacity limited,
amounting to several tens of GBs. Access patterns to
these tables generally exhibit a power-law distribution
where a small subset of (hot) table entries receive very
high access frequency while the remaining (cold) entries
receive only a small number of accesses. Because the
baseline mechanism allocates resources in a coarsegrained, model-wise fashion, each server replica must
allocate the entire embedding tables in memory without
accounting for the individual embedding’s actual “utility”. As such, the baseline model-wise resource allocation suffers from significant memory waste and limits the
total number of server replicas that can be instantiated
across the datacenter fleet, deteriorating fleet-wide QPS.
To this end, we propose ElasticRec, a RecSys model serving
architecture providing resource elasticity and high memory
efficiency. The unique aspects of ElasticRec are twofold. First,
our proposed system employs a microservice-based inference
server for high resource elasticity. Second, ElasticRec achieves
high memory efficiency via our utility-based resource allocation policy.
•

Microservice software architecture for RecSys. ElasticRec employs the microservice [44] programming model
as the core mechanism to enable fine-grained resource
allocation that meets the heterogeneous resource demands
of RecSys. The benefit of microservices is that it helps

Dense
input

Bottom MLP layers

User queries

User queries

User queries

Inference
server

Inference
server

Inference
server

ML model parameters
Categorical
input

Embedding table

Feature
interaction

Top MLP
layers

Prediction

ML framework (PyTorch)
Server API

Categorical
input

Embedding table

Fig. 1: A modern DNN-based RecSys model architecture.

Inference server container

(a)

partition a large monolithic application (in our case the
model-wise replication of a RecSys inference server)
into many fine-grained and loosely-coupled services.
ElasticRec partitions a target RecSys model into finegrained model shards, each of which is implemented as
a microservice and containerized for deployment. These
model shards are utilized as the unit of resource allocation which allows the container orchestration system,
Kubernetes [32], to independently scale the number of
shard replicas, providing high resource elasticity.
• Utility-based resource allocation policy. Our ElasticRec partitions the baseline monolithic RecSys model
architecture into two distinct model shard types, a shard
that handles dense DNN layers and sparse embedding
layers. The embedding layer shard is further partitioned
into hot and cold embedding shards based on the utility
of embedding table entries. Such design decision opens
up unique opportunities to properly align its resource
allocation with its actual utility. First, ElasticRec can now
selectively scale-out the number of replicas for the hot
embedding shards that matches its high memory access
demands. On the other hand, it also prevents ElasticRec from needlessly over-provisioning shard replicas
servicing cold embeddings thereby minimizing resource
waste. ElasticRec exploits these properties to design a
utility-based resource allocation policy that identifies the
optimal embedding table partitioning algorithm, which
Kubernetes’ autoscaling policy utilizes to replicate the
appropriate number of shards to fulfill a target QPS goal.
Overall, ElasticRec presents a model serving architecture
for RecSys that helps customize its resource allocation best
suited for its resource demand. We demonstrate that ElasticRec
provides an average 3.3× reduction in memory allocation
size and 8.1× increase in memory utility, which reduces
deployment cost by an average 1.6×.
II. BACKGROUND
A. DNN-based Recommendation Models
Recent RecSys combines both sparse and dense features to
enhance model accuracy and utilize two major components, a
dense DNN layer using multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) and a
sparse embedding layer (Figure 1). A sparse feature represents
a categorical input (e.g., Ads a user has clicked in the past) and
a dense feature represents a continuous input (e.g., user’s age).
Sparse features cannot be used directly as inputs to a dense
DNN layer because they represent categorical information.
As such, RecSys models use embedding tables to translate a

Scaling the replicas of servers

Software dependencies (libtorch, gRPC)

Kubernetes

(b)

Fig. 2: (a) A containerized ML inference server using model-wise
resource allocation, and (b) using Kubernetes to scale out multiple
server replicas across the datacenter to meet a target QPS goal.

given sparse feature value into a dense embedding vector. An
embedding table is an array of embedding vectors and a sparse
feature input (which is an index ID to the embedding table) is
used to read out a particular embedding vector from this table.
Because the number of unique items that fall under a sparse
feature category can amount to several millions to billions
(e.g., number of product items sold in Amazon), an embedding
table can be sized at several tens of GBs. In general, multiple
embeddings are gathered from a given embedding table which
are subsequently pooled into a single embedding vector using
reduction operations like element-wise additions.
There are two distinguishing aspects of embedding layers vs. dense DNN layers. First, the compute intensity of
embedding gather and pooling operations are extremely low,
exhibiting memory bandwidth limited behavior, especially for
embedding layers with large pooling values (number of embeddings to gather from a table). Second, because a modern
RecSys model employs multiple embedding tables, deploying
a RecSys model causes high memory capacity overheads.
B. Model Serving Architectures
ML inference server design. Current ML inference servers
utilize containers [10] for their deployment because of its
portability and scalability (e.g., TensorFlow Serving, TorchServe [48], [51]). A containerized ML inference server is
packaged as a Docker image which contains all the essential
ML software packages, the necessary system environment settings, and importantly the ML model to deploy. Because a ML
model is treated as one monolithic application to be serviced
and containers are the smallest unit of resource allocation and
deployment, any given replica of the containerized inference
server must contain a copy of the entire ML model parameters
(Figure 2(a)). This paper refers to such baseline resource
allocation mechanism as model-wise resource allocation.
Deploying inference servers at scale. The de facto standard
in container orchestration is Kubernetes [32] which helps
automate the deployment, scaling, and resource management
of the containerized inference servers at scale (Figure 2(b)).
Kubernetes cluster scheduler enables system designers to hand
over the responsibility of resource management by defining
deployment policies. When deploying an application, programmers can simply set the desired policy, and Kubernetes
transparently manages the allocation of resources based on
the specified policy. One important, automated resource man-

