Mind the Gap: Attainable Data Movement and
Operational Intensity Bounds for Tensor Algorithms
Qijing Huang

Po-An Tsai

Joel S. Emer

Angshuman Parashar

NVIDIA
jennyhuang@nvidia.com

NVIDIA
poant@nvidia.com

MIT CSAIL / NVIDIA
emer@csail.mit.edu

NVIDIA
aparashar@nvidia.com

Max effectual size

Abstract—The architectural design-space exploration (or DSE)
process—whether manual or automated—benefits greatly from
knowing the limits of the metrics of interest in advance. Data
movement is rapidly emerging as a critical metric for DSE due to
its increasing impact on both performance and energy efficiency.
Unfortunately, the commonly used algorithmic minimum (or
“compulsory misses”) limit for data movement is extremely loose,
limiting its utility in design-space search.
In this paper, we present Orojenesis, an approach to compute
data movement limits (or bounds) for tensor algorithms. Unlike
algorithmic-minimum bounds, Orojenesis comprehends reuse and
the ability of a buffer (such as a cache or scratchpad) to exploit
reuse to reduce data movement. Orojenesis provides a bound that
no dataflow or mapping can possibly exceed under varying onchip buffer capacity constraints, including mappings that fuse
a sequence of tensor operations to exploit producer-consumer
reuse. Orojenesis produces a plot that shows the relationship
between a buffer’s size and the lower data movement limit
to/from the next level in a memory hierarchy. This plot, dubbed
a ski-slope diagram, allows designers to gain critical insights into
the behavior of a workload as a function of storage capacity.
This analysis can inform early high-level design decisions before
embarking on thorough design space searches.
We use Orojenesis to analyze a set of valuable tensor algorithms including batched and grouped matrix multiplications,
convolutions, and sequences of operations in Large Language
Models (LLMs). Our analysis reveals a range of architectural
insights, including the fact that attainable data movement can
be orders-of-magnitude higher than algorithmic minimum, that
there exists a sweet spot between SRAM and compute resource
provisioning for optimal throughput, and that up to 5.6× data
movement reduction can be achieved with fusion with a buffer
capacity of 320MB for the GPT-3-6.7b LLM.

Gap 0
(Accesses)

NVIDIA CONFIDENTIAL. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE.

Gap 1
(Buf size)

NTECH2023

Fig. 1: Differences between the attainable data movement
and the algorithmic minimum (Gap 0), and between the
maximal effectual buffer (cache or scratchpad) size and the
total operand size (Gap 1). The green curve, which resembles
a ski slope, represents the desirable data movement bound in
relation to the buffer size requirement for a tensor operation.
demand—data movement is costly even within the on-chip
memory hierarchy [57].
Furthermore, newer architectures such as tensor accelerators
expose immense, multi-dimensional design spaces, and each
design exposes a large space of tiling, parallelization and
scheduling knobs (often referred to as the mapping space or
mapspace) for a single algorithm. This results in a complex cooptimization problem that has been attacked by recent research
on mapspace exploration [17], [27], [31], [43], [57], [62], [82],
[85], design-space exploration (DSE) [18], [30], [35], [41],
[64], [68], [75], [81]–[84], and co-optimization of these spaces
[28], [38].

I. I NTRODUCTION
Data movement is becoming an increasingly significant
component of the energy consumption of many applications.
This is primarily because process technology scales compute
far more efficiently than wires. The phenomenon is exacerbated for tensor algebra algorithms because hardware/algorithm co-designed optimizations such as quantization and
sparsity can disproportionately favor computation reduction
relative to data movement reduction. In addition to energy
costs, data movement also impacts performance if it saturates
any data movement channel in a system, such as memory
bandwidth. Therefore, optimizing data movement is becoming increasingly critical in the pursuit of more performant
and efficient architectural designs. Unfortunately, this is nontrivial. It isn’t sufficient to merely reduce memory bandwidth

In the real world, architects rarely utilize naı̈ve searches
of massive design spaces. Instead, they start with limit (i.e.,
“speeds and feeds”) studies to develop intuition, craft a set of
baseline designs based on this intuition, and then launch more
constrained design-space exploration studies around these
baselines. Unfortunately, these studies are typically carried
out using a primitive data movement limit called algorithmicminimum accesses. This limit (or bound) is equivalent to
compulsory misses for caches and is simply the sum of all
input and output operand sizes. This bound is extremely
loose (Gap 0 in Fig. 1) because the achievable access counts
with any realistic design may be orders of magnitude higher,

1

especially for memory levels closer to arithmetic units. One
might think that it would be sufficient to determine optimal
traffic using Bellady’s [7] algorithm, which is sensitive to
cache capacity, but it only models a single mapping (i.e., tiling,
parallelization and schedule) of the algorithm. Other works
(see Sec. X) do not provide tight bounds for a comprehensive
set of scenarios. Thus, these data movement analyses have limited utility in informing an architect’s intuition for designing
new architectures, especially radical new designs for which
optimizing compilers do not yet exist.
In this work, we present a methodology to compute data
movement bounds for tensor algorithms, creating diagrams
such as Fig. 1. Because Fig. 1 looks like a ski slope on
the side of a mountain, we call the process of creating these
“mountains” Orojenesis1 . Orojenesis provides tighter bounds
than algorithmic-minimum accesses because it comprehends
data reuse that a buffer (such as a cache, scratchpad or
buffet [61]) can exploit to reduce data movement. This is
especially true for the inner levels of a design’s memory
hierarchy, where data movement deviates significantly from
the algorithmic-minimum accesses. Orojenesis’ bound is also
mapping-independent because it provides a limit on what any
mapping of an algorithm can possibly extract from an architecture’s hierarchy without running an expensive mapspace
search on a complex hardware design. Given an unmapped
algorithm consisting of a sequence of tensor computations,
Orojenesis emits (Fig. 1) a Pareto-curve showing the minimal
attainable accesses for that algorithm subject to varying buffer
capacity constraints. Our main contribution is the Orojenesis
approach itself. Using a dramatically simplified proxy architecture called the Snowcat2 to model data movement between
a variable-size buffer and an infinite backing store, Orojenesis
derives the “ski slope” curve for a given tensor computation
using a mapspace search on this architecture. For sequences
of tensor computations, we identify the least-restrictive constraints that allow producer and consumer computations to
exchange data using tiles, enabling a space of fused mappings.
These constraints enable Orojenesis to derive the ski-slope
curve for the entire fused sequence. Armed with this model,
we derive a diverse range of architectural insights.
First— we show how the ski-slope curve can be used to
address critical questions on the behavior of an algorithm on
an architecture, such as:
• Given a buffer capacity, what is the minimal attainable
backing store access count, or equivalently, the maximal
attainable operational intensity? [Gap 0]
• How much additional buffer capacity is required to
achieve the algorithmic-minimum backing store access
count? [Gap 1]
• How does the algorithm benefit from an incremental
increase in buffer capacity? [rate of change of Gap 0]
Second—we highlight trade-offs between fused and unfused
mapping strategies under varying buffer capacity constraints,
1 Adapted from the word “orogenesis” which means mountain creation.
2 Inspired by the snowcat vehicle used for crafting ski slopes [1].

32.3x

L2 <-> L1/SMEM
6.5x

DRAM <-> L2

Memory Type
Reads
Write

1.0x

Algo Min
0

1

2

3

4
Bytes

5

6

7
1e9

Fig. 2: Memory and cache accesses compared to algorithmic
minimum for a 4k 4k 4k GEMM on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.
Normalized minimal buffer size to enable full reuse
0.00%
1m vadd
0.20%
1kx1k gemv
33%
1kx1kx1k gemm
1x1 conv 11%
23%
3x3 conv
3x3 conv s2 14%
5x5 conv 12%
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Fig. 3: Maximal effectual buffer size to enable full tensor reuse
normalized to total tensor size.
and show that fusion, while often beneficial, isn’t always optimal due to the constraints it imposes on intra-layer mappings.
Third—we analyze fusion opportunities in the GPT-3-6.7b
Large Language Model (LLM), revealing that up to a 5.6×
reduction in data movement can be achieved with a buffer
size of 320 MB.
Fourth—we develop a performance model that takes the
buffer-to-compute area ratio as input and yields throughput
performance, utilizing Orojenesis bounds. This model, which
is a concave function, facilitates rapid, one-shot design decisions for various tensor algorithms.
We believe that Orojenesis is a radical new approach
for early-stage architectural DSE, providing significantly
improved accuracy over crude algorithmic-minimum or
operational-intensity based analyses, while avoiding the
implementation-specific pitfalls of traditional cache-based
studies and the intractable mapspace searches of contemporary
tensor accelerator frameworks.
II. M OTIVATION
During early hardware design space exploration, one of
the first analyses an architect conducts is a “speeds and
feeds” study on data movement and computation required by
the algorithms of interest. Often, operational intensities (OI)
[25]—i.e., the ratio of compute to data movement—of various
algorithms are used as input in a roofline performance model
[76] to quickly estimate whether a target workload is expected
to be computation-limited or memory bandwidth-limited.
The data movement metric used for this analysis is called
the algorithmic minimum (equivalent to compulsory misses
with a cache-based design) and is simply the sum of all
operand sizes. Unfortunately, this metric can be too optimistic.
For example, Fig. 2 compares the algorithmic-minimum tensor
accesses for a 4k 4k 4k GEMM workload with the data

