2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Tender: Accelerating Large Language Models via
Tensor Decomposition and Runtime Requantization
Jungi Lee∗

Wonbeom Lee∗

Jaewoong Sim

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
{jungi.lee, wonbeom, jaewoong}@snu.ac.kr

TPUs, in addition to beneﬁting from memory capacity and
bandwidth savings.
However, it is quite challenging to quantize the activations
in LLMs, unlike convolutional neural networks or small Transformer models. When the LLM scales beyond a certain size
(around 6.7B parameters), extremely large magnitude values,
compared to others, appear in a few feature dimensions of
activations [11]. These outliers increase the quantization range,
thereby necessitating the use of larger bit widths in LLMs
compared to other DNN models.
As such, there have been recent efforts to effectively quantize activations in LLMs using low-bit integers in both software and algorithm-hardware co-design works. However, most
software-only works do not noticeably reduce the inference
time due to the overhead of complex algorithms or result
in a signiﬁcant quantization loss at ultra low-bit precisions
(e.g., 4 bits) [11], [33], [65], [66]. Also, prior works dealing
with outliers via algorithm-hardware co-designs require either
mixed-precision/complex compute units [11], [44], [52], [70]
or custom/adaptive datatypes that are not natively supported
by commodity hardware [20], [21], [55].
In this paper, we propose Tender, an algorithm-hardware
co-design technique that efﬁciently executes LLMs in the
high-throughput integer pipeline without the need of mixedprecision compute units or custom/adaptive datatypes. The
high-level idea behind Tender is to split the activation tensor
into several subtensors along the feature/channel dimensions
(e.g., columns in 2D), each of which contains the elements
with a similar range of values, effectively isolating the channels that contain outliers from the others. Each subtensor is
then quantized with a different scale factor, thereby reducing
the quantization error for the entire activation tensor compared
to the conventional per-tensor (or per-row) quantization variants.
While this has the great potential to enhance model performance compared to previous LLM quantization works,
setting different scale factors for each subtensor requires
explicit and costly rescaling/requantization (i.e., dequantization/quantization) when adding up the partial sums (i.e., outer
products) from matrix multiplications of the subtensors. Our
key insight is that we can avoid the explicit requantization step
by setting the scale factors with power-of-two relationships
between the decomposed subtensors and employing simple

Abstract—Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate outstanding performance in various tasks in machine learning and
have thus become one of the most important workloads in today’s
computing landscape. However, deploying LLM inference poses
challenges due to the high compute and memory requirements
stemming from the enormous model size and the difﬁculty of
running it in the integer pipelines. In this paper, we present
Tender, an algorithm-hardware co-design solution that enables
efﬁcient deployment of LLM inference at low precision. Based on
our analysis of outlier values in LLMs, we propose a decomposed
quantization technique in which the scale factors of decomposed
matrices are powers of two apart. The proposed scheme allows us
to avoid explicit requantization (i.e., dequantization/quantization)
when accumulating the partial sums from the decomposed matrices, with a minimal extension to the commodity tensor compute
hardware. Our evaluation shows that Tender achieves higher
accuracy and inference performance compared to the state-ofthe-art methods while also being signiﬁcantly less intrusive to the
existing accelerators.
Index Terms—Large Language Model; LLM Acceleration

I. I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a variety of tasks in natural language
processing, including machine translation, sentiment analysis,
and even generating human-like text, as evidenced by recent
applications such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google’s Gemini [1], [19], [42], [56], [64]. The tremendous success of LLMs
can be largely attributed to their enormous model size, which
has seen substantial growth in recent years. For example, the
ﬁrst version of GPT, which was introduced in 2018, had 117
million parameters, but the recently released GPT-4 is rumored
to contain more than a trillion parameters only after ﬁve years.
LLM inference has now become one of the most important
workloads in today’s computing landscape, but deploying and
serving LLMs poses a unique challenge because it requires a
signiﬁcant amount of compute and memory resources due to
the massive model size. Quantization [11], [18], [50], [66] is
one of the most popular techniques to mitigate the resource
problem. By quantizing both weights and activations in LLMs
into low-bit integers, we can accelerate compute-intensive
operations such as matrix multiplication while leveraging highthroughput integer tensor compute units in modern GPUs or
∗ Equal contribution

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00080

1048



shifter logic in the tensor compute units. This approach provides us with two key beneﬁts. First, it makes requantization
implicit, being it performed along with matrix multiplication
without involving explicit ﬂoating-point operations, leading to
negligible overhead for rescaling when accumulating the partial sums. Second, it enables higher model performance while
being signiﬁcantly less intrusive to the conventional tensor
compute units as it does not require complex hardware to
handle mixed-precision or custom datatypes, thereby offering
more ﬂexible and practical applicability than other algorithmoriented schemes or outlier-aware architectures. While the
Tender algorithm can be implemented in software, its full
potential is realized through a custom accelerator design that
supports implicit requantization, which we discuss in Section IV.
We apply our decomposed quantization technique to three
representative LLMs for evaluation. To measure the performance improvement, we implement a cycle-level simulator
that models the Tender hardware with a detailed off-chip
memory timing model. We use simulation parameters based
on our RTL implementation, which is synthesized with a 28
nm process node. Our evaluation shows that INT8 quantization
via Tender offers better model performance than the state-ofthe-art and retains comparable model performance to the FP16
baseline (e.g., less than a 0.1 increase in perplexity for OPT6.7B, OPT-13B, and OPT-66B). In INT4 quantization, Tender
outperforms any other outlier-aware post-training quantization
(PTQ) techniques (up to 10988× lower perplexity). Also,
the Tender hardware achieves up to an average of 2.63×
speedup over the outlier-aware accelerators that we evaluate.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We propose Tender, a PTQ approach for LLMs in pursuit
of hardware performance as well as model accuracy.
Tender achieves high performance and accuracy without
the need of mixed-precision compute units or custom
datatypes even for low-bit quantization.
• We propose the “power of 2” channel decomposition
rule, which effectively reduces the quantization error by
harmonically working with LLM activation tensors.
• We present the Tender accelerator design, which overcomes performance challenges in splitting activations
along the channels and enables implicit/runtime requantization with negligible rescaling overhead, with a minimal
extension to the commodity tensor compute hardware.





 



   
  

  
 





 










   
  

   
  




  
  

 






  







Figure 1: Illustration of the Transformer block architecture.

(WV ), and output (WO ) projection matrices. Each projection
matrix has a dimension of dmodel × dmodel , where dmodel is
the dimension of an input embedding vector (i.e., the number
of features). For an input sequence length of n (i.e., n tokens),
the input (X) to the attention layer is an n × dmodel matrix.
Then, each of the query (XQ ), key (XK ), value (XV ) matrices
of the attention layer is computed by multiplying the input
matrix (X) with their respective weight matrices (W ).
X Q = X × WQ ;

X K = X × WK ;

X V = X × WV

After the QKV projection, we compute the attention score
(XS ) and the attention value (XS ×XV ) using the projected
matrices. Lastly, the output of the attention layer (XO ) is
computed by multiplying the attention value (XS ×XV ) with
the output weight matrix (WO ) along with a residual add (X).
XS =
XO =

T
softmax(XQ × XK
)
X S × X V × WO + X

The feed-forward network (FFN) in the Transformer block
takes as input the output of the attention layer (XO ). It consists
of two fully-connected (FC) layers, thus there are two weight
matrices, WF C1 and WF C2 , each of which has dmodel × h
and h × dmodel dimensions. The output of the feed-forward
layer (XT ) is computed using the following equation.
XT =

ReLU(XO × WF C1 ) × WF C2 + XO

In addition, there exists a layer normalization operation
(LayerNorm) at the start or the end of each attention and
FFN layer, which we omit in the ﬁgure for simplicity. The
Transformer block produces an output with the same dimensionality as the input, which makes Transformer-based LLMs
easily scalable by adjusting the number of Transformer blocks.

II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
A. Large Language Models

B. Outliers in Large Language Models

In essence, LLMs build on a series of Transformer
blocks [59], each of which consists of the attention and feedforward layers, as illustrated in Figure 1. In this section,
for ease of understanding the subsequent sections, we brieﬂy
describe the operation ﬂow within the Transformer block using
the terminology and notation used throughout the paper.
In the attention layer, there are four weight matrices, which
are used for linear projections: query (WQ ), key (WK ), value

The state-of-the-art post-training quantization (PTQ) methods [16], [33] demonstrate that the weights in LLMs can be
effectively quantized to eight or even four bits via standard pertensor (e.g., a scaling factor for each tensor) or grouping-based
(e.g., a scaling factor for g consecutive weights in a tensor)
quantization techniques without a signiﬁcant degradation in
model performance. In contrast, it is quite challenging to
quantize activations in LLMs using the same methods due

1049

