pSyncPIM: Partially Synchronous Execution of
Sparse Matrix Operations for All-Bank PIM
Architectures
Daehyeon Baek†∗ , Soojin Hwang‡ , Jaehyuk Huh‡
† Technology Research, Samsung SDS, Seoul, Korea
‡ School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea

dh04.baek@samsung.com, sjhwang@casys.kaist.ac.kr, jhhuh@kaist.ac.kr
based on GDDR6. The commercial incarnations of PIM
maintain the standard JEDEC interfaces to control DRAM
while adding compute units. With the standard interface, the
current HBM or GDDR-based GPU or accelerators can readily
use these new PIM technologies. However, the commercial
PIM architectures support only dense BLAS (Basic Linear
Algebra Subprograms) operations, with its synchronous allbank controls of many banks in DRAM.
Sparse matrix operations are critical computations that can
significantly benefit from the internal bandwidth of PIM, and
several PIM-based designs have been proposed in academia to
support such operations. They assume a standalone PIM without considering the external interface. Thus, each processing
unit attached to its memory bank works independently by the
internal memory controllers in the logic layer. SpaceA is a
sparse matrix-vector multiplication accelerator (SpMV) based
on HMC (Hybrid Memory Cube), in which each processing
unit performs SpMV computation independently [47]. Gearbox deploys processing units for each subarray in the bank,
enabling higher internal bandwidth [25].
However, there is a significant gap between the commercial
implementations and the prior studies. First, unlike per-bank
controls from the processing units for the earlier studies [25],
[47], the commercial PIM designs [23], [24] use host chip
DRAM controllers to execute all banks synchronously by
a single command to follow the standard interface while
exploiting bank-level memory bandwidth. Second, commercial
designs limit the computing element attached to a bank to
access only its bank, unlike remote bank accesses allowed in
academic studies through on-chip networks on the logic layer.
For dense BLAS operations, all-bank controls without remote
bank accesses do not cause severe problems as each bank has
equally distributed input matrix workloads and executes the
same sequence of instructions.
However, the restriction imposed by the commercial designs
significantly affects the irregular computation of sparse matrix
operations. Sparse matrix-vector operations require diverging
executions in each bank due to random sparsity patterns,
while the current all-bank PIM cannot manage such divergence in the execution path. The load balancing across banks
becomes critical as remote bank accesses are impossible.
In addition, the prior sparse matrix-vector accelerators are

Abstract—Recent commercial incarnations of processing-inmemory (PIM) maintain the standard DRAM interface and
employ the all-bank mode execution to maximize bank-level
memory bandwidth. Such a synchronized all-bank PIM control can effectively manage conventional dense matrix-vector
operations on evenly distributed matrices across banks with
lock-step execution. Sparse matrix processing is another critical
computation that can significantly benefit from the PIM architecture, but the current all-bank PIM control cannot support
diverging executions due to the random sparsity. To accelerate
such sparse matrix applications, this paper proposes a partially
synchronous execution on sparse matrix-vector multiplication
(SpMV) and sparse triangular matrix-vector solve (SpTRSV),
filling the gap between the practical constraint of PIM and the
irregular nature of sparse computation. It allows the execution
of the processing unit of each bank to diverge in a limited
way to manage the irregular execution path of sparse matrix
computation. It proposes compaction and distribution policies
for the input matrix and vector. In addition to SpMV, this paper
identifies SpTRSV is another key kernel, and proposes SpTRSV
acceleration on PIM technology. The experimental evaluation
shows that the new sparse PIM architecture outperforms NVIDIA
Geforce RTX 3080 GPU by 4.43× speedup for SpMV and
3.53× speedup for SpTRSV with a similar amount of DRAM
bandwidth.
Index Terms—processing-in-memory, sparse matrix, memory
bandwidth, predicated execution.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Despite rapidly increasing GPU computation capability to
the PFLOPS scale, the improvement in memory bandwidth
has been lagging behind [3]. This disparity between memory bandwidth and computation capability poses a significant challenge for high-performance computing problems and
graph applications that use memory-intensive kernels, such
as matrix-vector multiplication and triangular matrix-vector
solve. To address this memory bandwidth problem, processingin-memory (PIM) has emerged as an alternative solution, using
the internal bank-level bandwidth of DRAM by attaching
processing elements directly to each bank.
Following many research investigations on the potential of
PIM technology, DRAM manufacturers recently released PIM
products to address such demands on memory bandwidth [23],
[24]. Samsung Electronics has announced HBM2-based HBMPIM [24], and SK Hynix has released GDDR6-AiM PIM [23]
∗ This work was done at KAIST while Daehyeon Baek was a PhD student.

1

missing a crucial operation, such as sparse triangular matrixvector solve (SpTRSV), commonly used in many applications.
The earlier studies proposed several ways to optimize the
SpTRSV kernel on GPU with various techniques to reduce
data dependency between matrix rows [1], [28], [40], [49].
However, these approaches cannot overcome the fundamental
limitations of SpTRSV execution, in which SpTRSV itself
has a low arithmetic intensity. Therefore, their approaches are
bound to the memory bandwidth, incurring low GPU usages.
To support sparse operations effectively with PIM, this
paper proposes a partially synchronous control of banks for
all-bank PIM architectures called pSyncPIM to fill the gap
between the commercial all-bank PIM and irregular sparse matrix operations. The new partially synchronous control allows
the processing units to diverge their execution path in a limited
way to maintain the all-bank execution constraint. Reads and
writes on rows of all banks are synchronized with the allbank control. However, each processing unit can operate on a
different portion of the opened row of its bank. In addition,
each processing unit can skip or exit the row computation
early if it does not have any element to compute. The partially
synchronous execution allows the all-bank PIM to support
diverging execution with sparse data. However, the processing
units need careful data distribution and compaction if too many
divergences occur. Therefore, we propose data compaction
and distribution policies to optimize the matrix and vector
distribution across banks to maximize the processing unit
utilization for random sparsity patterns.
In addition, our design accelerates SpTRSV by effectively
utilizing internal memory bandwidth with the all-bank PIM design, which overcomes the memory bandwidth limit of GPUbased work approaches. While the cuSPARSE [30] library uses
only the row-reordering technique to batch independent rows
in the matrix to process, pSyncPIM uses a recursive block
algorithm [1] to match the hardware limitation of memory
row size, boosting the kernel performance.
We modified DRAMsim3 [27] to support all-bank PIM
architectures and added our partially synchronous execution
support. The experimental evaluation shows that the new
sparse PIM architecture can outperform NVIDIA Geforce
RTX 3080 by 443% for SpMV kernels and 353% for SpTRSV
kernels with a similar amount of HBM memory bandwidth.
This study is the first one to support irregular execution
for sparse matrices with all-bank PIM architectures. The
contributions of the paper are as follows:

Name

Operation
Level 1 BLAS

Swap
xd ↔ yd
Scale
xd ← axd
Copy
yd ← xd
AXPY
yd ← axd + yd
Dot Product
s ← xT
d yd
Euclidian Norm
s ← ∥xd ∥2
Level 1 Sparse BLAS
Gather
xs ← yd
Scatter
yd ← xs
Level 2 Sparse BLAS and its variants
SpMV
C ← Ab
x ← L−1 b
SpTRSV
x ← U −1 b
Level 3 Sparse BLAS variants
SpGEMM
C ← AB

TABLE I: Important operations on graph applications and
linear system solvers. x, xd , yd , and b are dense vectors. a
and s are scalars. xs is a sparse vector. A, B, and C are
sparse matrices. L is a lower triangular matrix. U is an upper
triangular matrix.
Single-Bank Mode (SB)

All-Bank Mode (AB)

Bank

Bank
AB enter

Bank

Bank
AB exit

All-Bank PIM Mode (AB-PIM)
AB-PIM
enter
AB-PIM
exit

Bank

Bank

Host accesses
a single row

Host accesses
multiple rows of all banks &
PIM kernel programming

Bank

PE

Bank

PE

Bank

PE

Memory command triggers
PIM kernel execution

Fig. 1: Execution model of HBM-PIM.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Major Sparse Matrix Kernels in Real-World Applications
The two significant problem spaces of real-world applications that use sparse matrices are graph applications and linear
system problems. These applications comprise a small number
of matrix and vector operations, as Table I summarizes.
From these operations, graph applications use operations
with SpGEMM (Sparse General Matrix Multiplication), SpMV
(Sparse Matrix-Vector Multiplication), and BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subproblems) level 1 vector operation kernels.
On the other hand, many linear system-solving applications
use iterative methods over direct Gaussian elimination-based
methods to generate approximate solutions to the linear system
problem from the sparse matrix for high performance. Many
linear system applications, including Conjugate Gradient [19]
and its variant [43], use SpMV kernels and element-wise dense
vector operations, including scale, copy, AXPY, dot product,
and Euclidean norms in iterations. In addition, these iterative
methods use approximate sparse lower/upper triangular matrices L and U where A ≈ LU. These methods compute
x′ = U−1 L−1 x to reduce the number of iterations and faster
convergence, where SpTRSV is critical.

We propose a PIM architecture in which each bank is
controlled by the same commands in an all-bank synchronized manner. However, the actual execution path of
each bank can diverge to process irregular sparse matrix
operations.
• With pSyncPIM, we propose a sparse matrix workload
distribution algorithm to minimize the overhead of SpMV
due to the unevenness of the sparse matrix data.
• We propose a PIM acceleration scheme for SpTRSV by
adopting a recursive block algorithm [1].

•

2

