2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

DyLeCT: Achieving Huge-page-like Translation
Performance for Hardware-compressed Memory
Gagandeep Panwar, Muhammad Laghari, Esha Choukse† , Xun Jian

† Microsoft Research
Virginia Tech
gpanwar@vt.edu, mlaghari@vt.edu, esha.choukse@microsoft.com, xunj@vt.edu

This new layer of dynamic address translation, however,
can signiﬁcantly harm the performance of large and irregular workloads. These workloads already suffer from high
virtual memory translation overhead (i.e., high number of
TLB misses). Adding a new layer of address translation to
enable hardware memory compression can effectively double
the existing translation misses by adding a new CTE cache
miss beyond the old TLB miss.
To optimize virtual memory translation for large and irregular workloads, modern OS and CPU support huge (e.g., 2MB)
pages. In our real-system evaluation of large and irregular
workloads commonly studied in recent address translation
works, using 2MB huge pages provides 1.75x the average
program-level speedup over using standard 4KB pages.
No huge-page-like translation, however, exists in the new
layer of address translation required by hardware memory
compression. Consider a recent prior work [27], which uses
a 64-bit translation per 4KB page and a 64KB CTE cache;
even after doubling its CTE cache to 128KB, the CTE cache
can still only provide a small translation reach of 64MB.
Compared to a typical TLB that can provide >2GB reach
when the running program uses 2MB huge pages [15], [47],
a 64MB translation reach represents a 2GB/64MB=32x lower
translation reach.
A naive approach to enable huge-page-like translation reach
is to compress and migrate data at 2MB granularity; this allows
a single CTE to perform address translation for 2MB worth
of data. However, always moving 2MB of data together can
consume signiﬁcant memory bandwidth and severely degrade
memory performance.
We note that to fully utilize all the compression-freed
spaces, prior works on hardware memory compression deploy
fully-associative and non-aligned data placement; but such
a highly ﬂuid data placement requires long (e.g., 64-bit)
translations. Long translations consume signiﬁcant space in
the CTE cache; this causes the CTE cache to hold relatively
few translations and, thus, provide low translation reach.
We observe just like how a mixture of rigid (i.e., harderto-move) pebbles and ﬂuid water can ﬁll a jar equally well
as purely water, using a mixture of ﬂuid data placement and
rigid (i.e. lowly-associative and aligned) data placement can
also completely ﬁll all space in memory. While a rigid data
placement only supports a few (e.g., three) possible DRAM
locations per unit of data, this limited choice of DRAM
locations only needs short (e.g., 2-bit) translations to encode;

Abstract—To expand effective memory capacity, hardware
memory compression transparently compresses and packs memory values more densely together in DRAM. This requires introducing a new layer of hardware-managed address translation in
the memory controller (MC). However, for large and irregular
workloads that already suffer from frequent virtual address
translation misses in the TLB, adding an additional layer of
address translation can double the translation misses (e.g., by
adding a new miss in the MC per TLB miss). While TLB
misses can be drastically reduced by using huge pages, no prior
work has explored huge-page-like translation reach for hardware
memory compression. While compressing and moving an entire
huge page worth of data at a time can lead to huge-page-like
address translation, moving a huge page worth of data together
can consume an exorbitant amount of memory bandwidth.
This paper explores how to achieve huge-page-like translation
performance in this new address translation layer, while keeping
compression at the page (instead of huge page) granularity. We
propose dynamically shortening the translation entries of hot
pages to only a few bits per entry by migrating hot pages to
the limited number of DRAM locations whose addresses can be
encoded using a few bits; colder pages still use the bigger fulllength translations so that colder pages can be placed anywhere
in memory to fully utilize all the space in memory. Each short
translation is tiny (e.g., 2 bits); as such, a 128KB translation
cache ﬁlled mostly with short translations can achieve similar
(e.g., 2GB) total translation reach as a TLB ﬁlled entirely with
huge page entries. Evaluations show our idea – Dynamic Length
Compressed-Memory Translations (DyLeCT) – improves average
performance by 10.25% over the prior art.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Main memory accounts for a signiﬁcant portion of operating
cost for cloud service providers and hyperscalers. For example,
Meta, a prominent hyperscaler, reports that memory accounts
for 30% of total hardware infrastructure cost [46].
Hardware memory compression is a promising technique to
increase effective memory capacity [6], [7], [17], [27], [33],
[37], [43], [52]. It enhances the CPU’s memory controller
(MC) to transparently compress and pack data more densely in
memory; transparently migrating data in turn requires adding a
new layer of dynamic address translation beyond the existing
virtual-to-physical memory translation. Speciﬁcally, the MC
manages a linear array of translation entries that we call
the compressed-memory translation entries (CTEs). The CTEs
collectively form a large translation table that is stored in
memory. To avoid fetching a CTE from memory for every
memory request, the MC caches CTEs in a dedicated CTE
cache, which serves as a similar purpose as the TLB.

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00085

1129

KƉĞƌĂƚŝŶŐ^ǇƐƚĞŵ͛ƐsŝĞǁ

^ŚŽƌƚ
dƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶ

3) We address the unique design challenges of how to
effectively use both types of translations together.
4) Our evaluations show DyLeCT improves average performance by 10.25% over a recent prior work –TMCC–
without sacriﬁcing memory compression ratio. DyLeCT
is also a simple design that only modiﬁes a single
hardware component – the memory controller.

>ŽŶŐ
dƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶ

Prior Work

DĞŵŽƌǇŽŶƚƌŽůůĞƌ͛ƐsŝĞǁ

K^WĂŐĞƐ;ϰ dŽƚĂůͿ

ZDWĂŐĞƐ;ϯdŽƚĂůͿ

WĂŐĞϬ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϮ
WĂŐĞϯ

WĂŐĞϬ

WĂŐĞϮ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϯ
>ĞŐĞŶĚ

;ĂͿ>ŽŶŐƚƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶƐ
K^WĂŐĞƐ;ϰdŽƚĂůͿ

ZDWĂŐĞƐ;ϯdŽƚĂůͿ

WĂŐĞϬ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϮ
WĂŐĞϯ

WĂŐĞϬ

tĂƐƚĞĚ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϮ
tĂƐƚĞĚ

;ďͿ^ŚŽƌƚƚƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶƐ
K^WĂŐĞƐ;ϰdŽƚĂůͿ

ZDWĂŐĞƐ;ϯdŽƚĂůͿ

WĂŐĞϬ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϮ
WĂŐĞϯͲ ,Žƚ

WĂŐĞϯ
WĂŐĞϭ
WĂŐĞϬ
WĂŐĞϮ

;ĐͿǇ>Ğd͗hƐĞƐďŽƚŚͲ ;ϭͿ^ŚŽƌƚƚƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶƐĂŶĚ;ϮͿ>ŽŶŐƚƌĂŶƐůĂƚŝŽŶƐ

Figure 1: (a) Long translations provide full freedom of data placement to fully
utilize all irregularly-sized compression-freed spaces. (b) Short translations
restrict data placement and waste space. In this example, a short translation
can only store an OS page p at the start of DRAM page d = p%3 or DRAM
page d = (p + 1)%3 where 3 is the total number of DRAM pages. Dashed
line indicates placement conﬂicts for OS page 3. (c) DyLeCT uses both short
translations and long translations. Short translations are more cache friendly
and long translations eliminate any wasted space.

RMC [7]
LCP [33]
Compresso [6]

Comp.
Ratio
1.30x
1.69x
1.85x

TMCC [27]

3.40x

This Work

3.40x

Perf. Improvement
N/A
+6% vs RMC
+6% vs LCP
+14% vs Compresso
@ 1.85x Comp. Ratio.
+10.25%vs TMCC
(under huge pages)

Modiﬁcations vs.
Current Systems
MC
MC, TLBs
MC
MC, L2$
MC

Table 1: Contrasting DyLeCT with prior works.

II. R ELATED W ORKS ON H ARDWARE M EMORY
C OMPRESSION
Many prior works propose enhancing the memory controller
(MC) to dynamically compress data in DRAM; they propose
adding decompressor and compressor hardware to the MC to
read and write compressed data in an OS-transparent manner.
These prior works broadly fall under two categories.
One category uses compression to save memory bandwidth
[13], [16], [17], [48], [49]. They compress data and store them
in or near their original locations and, therefore, leave many
unused compression-freed spaces scattered across DRAM; as
such, they do not improve effective memory density/capacity.
The second category uses compression to increase the
effective memory capacity exposed to the OS [6], [7], [27],
[33], [37], [43], [52]. These works migrate compressed data
closely together to improve effective memory density/capacity.
As such, they can enable the OS to use several times (e.g., 4x)
more OS physical memory than the amount of DRAM in the
system. This can help avoid swapping out data when memory
pressure is high2 . Minimizing swapping out in turn also helps
to preserve huge pages; before swapping out, today’s OS ﬁrst
breaks down huge pages into standard pages because directly
swapping huge pages can be prohibitively expensive.
This paper focuses on using hardware memory compression
to improve effective memory capacity.

a CTE cache can hold many times more short translations
(e.g., 64b/2b=32x) than long translations and close the gap in
translation reach with a TLB that serves huge pages.
While only some pages can beneﬁt from short translations,
we note translation caches generally favor hot pages as they
cache the translations of recently-accessed pages. As such, we
propose dynamically switching hot pages to short translations
and switching cold pages to long translations; this enables
the CTE cache to mostly cache short translations and provide
high translation reach. We call our idea Dynamic Length
Compressed-Memory Translations (DyLeCT1 ). DyLeCT dynamically migrates hot pages to the limited DRAM locations
whose addresses short translations can encode, by displacing
cold pages to DRAM locations whose addresses only long
translations can encode (see Figure 1c). While designing
DyLeCT, we address a key challenge of how to minimize
data movement overheads and also redesign the CTE table and
cache organizations to tailor to dynamic-length translations.
Our evaluation shows that DyLeCT improve the performance of translation-intensive workloads by 10.25% over the
prior art. Table 1 compares DyLeCT to prior works.
We make the following contributions in this paper:

A. Background on Memory Address Translation for Hardware
Memory Compression

1) We explore how to enable huge-page-like translation
performance in the new address translation layer introduced by hardware-compressed memory.
2) We propose Dynamic Length Compressed-Memory
Translations (DyLeCT) to dynamically switch between
short and long translations on a per-page basis to achieve
the best of both worlds – high translation hit rate and
high memory density/capacity.

Hardware memory compression transparently migrates compressed data to pack it densely in DRAM. Prior works track
this data movement by adding a new layer of hardwaremanaged translation that consists of a linear array of
compressed-memory translation entries (CTEs). Instead of
storing a tuple of col:row:bank:channel IDs, each CTE records
2 Even when memory pressure is low, freeing up memory via hardware
memory compression could still be useful as free memory can be used to
opportunistically boost memory performance [28], [32], [51].

1 It is pronounced as Dialect, as the two types of translations are different

ways or dialects of communicating the same DRAM address.

1130

