A Hardware Evaluation Framework for Large
Language Model Inference

arXiv:2312.03134v1 [cs.AR] 5 Dec 2023

Hengrui Zhang, August Ning, Rohan Prabhakar, David Wentzlaff
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
{hengrui.zhang, aning, rohanbp, wentzlaf} @princeton.edu
Abstract—The past year has witnessed the increasing popularity of Large Language Models (LLMs). Their unprecedented
scale and associated high hardware cost have impeded their
broader adoption, calling for efficient hardware designs. With the
large hardware needed to simply run LLM inference, evaluating
different hardware designs becomes a new bottleneck.
This work introduces LLMCompass, a hardware evaluation
framework for LLM inference workloads. LLMCompass is fast,
accurate, versatile, and able to describe and evaluate different
hardware designs. LLMCompass includes a mapper to automatically find performance-optimal mapping and scheduling. It also
incorporates an area-based cost model to help architects reason
about their design choices. Compared to real-world hardware,
LLMCompass’ estimated latency achieves an average 10.4% error rate across various operators with various input sizes and an
average 4.1% error rate for LLM inference. With LLMCompass,
simulating a 4-NVIDIA A100 GPU node running GPT-3 175B
inference can be done within 16 minutes on commodity hardware,
including 26,400 rounds of the mapper’s parameter search.
With the aid of LLMCompass, this work draws architectural
implications and explores new cost-effective hardware designs. By
reducing the compute capability or replacing High Bandwidth
Memory (HBM) with traditional DRAM, these new designs
can achieve as much as 3.41x improvement in performance/cost
compared to an NVIDIA A100, making them promising choices
for democratizing LLMs.
LLMCompass is planned to be fully open-source.

LLMCompass (Sec. III)
Performance Model
(Sec. III-B)

Performance
Report

Mapper
LLM Computational
Graph

Mapping &
Scheduling

Hardware Description
(Sec. III-A)

Architecture
Simulator

Area Model
(Sec. III-D)

Parameter
Search

Area Report

Fig. 1: An Overview of LLMCompass. LLMCompass can aid
the hardware design process as a versatile evaluation tool.
intense compute and memory hardware demand required for
LLM inference, this tool needs to be as fast as possible
without sacrificing accuracy. ② Architecturally descriptive.
This tool should be general enough to describe different design
choices: If it only applies to a specific architecture, the design
space for computer architects will be limited. ③ Performanceoptimal. The hardware performance is also affected by how
the software is programmed (e.g., how to map the workload
to the hardware). The evaluation tool should optimize this
software domain to fully demonstrate the hardware capability
of each design. ④ Cost-aware. We also want to know how
different hardware design choices affect the hardware cost to
reason about cost-performance trade-offs.
Existing tools fail to meet these requirements. Roofline
model analysis is fast but not accurate, and cycle-level simulators are accurate but slow. FPGA emulation is accurate
and provides area statistics but requires significant engineering
effort. To evaluate large-scale hardware designs in the era of
LLMs, a new hardware evaluation tool is needed.
Lack of knowledge on how different hardware design
choices affect LLM inference performance. As an emerging
application, the hardware characteristics of LLMs remain to
be understood. Besides the large volume of compute and
memory requirements, LLMs are also unique in their autoregressive way of generating tokens. We are interested in
exploring whether these properties of LLMs will change
common architecture wisdom.
Lack of cost-effective hardware designs to democratize LLMs. LLMs are powerful and capable, but are costprohibitive to deploy. To serve GPT-3, a DGX A100 compute

I. I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs), the technology behind
OpenAI ChatGPT [47], Github Copilot [20], and Google
Bard [22], are gaining widespread attention from the whole
society. The capability of LLMs is related to their model
size [27], [29], and larger models [7], [10] show impressive
abilities [71] compared to smaller counterparts [15], [53], with
future models expected to exceed trillions of parameters [16].
This unprecedented scale of LLMs poses challenges to
deployment. Serving a GPT-3 (175B parameters) inference
requires a minimum of five NVIDIA A100s solely to accommodate the model parameters (in half precision). This
substantial hardware cost impedes the broader adoption of
LLMs and motivates computer architects to design more costeffective hardware. We identify three challenges that exist in
designing hardware for LLM inference:
Lack of tools to evaluate hardware designs. Before diving
into writing the RTL code, hardware designers may want
to first sketch and compare different design choices. There
are many properties we want for such a hardware evaluation
tool before writing RTL. ① Fast and accurate. Due to the

1

node can cost over $100,000 USD [44], with each NVIDIA
A100 featuring 54B transistors and 80 GB of High Bandwidth
Memory (HBM). This high hardware cost hinders democratizing LLMs.
In this paper, we tackle these challenges and make three
main contributions.
(1) We introduce LLMCompass, a hardware evaluation
framework for LLM inference workloads (Sec. III). LLMCompass leverages the fact that mainstream ML hardware
platforms share many architectural commonalities, allowing
us to develop a general hardware description template for
them. We also observe LLMs’ computational graphs are
composed of dense operators: matrix multiplication, softmax,
layer normalization, etc., all of which have a structural and
hence predictable compute and memory access pattern. This
allows LLMCompass to perform faster, higher-level tile-bytile (block-by-block) simulations without losing accuracy compared to cycle-accurate simulators. The framework implements
a mapper to manually manage the memory hierarchy and find
the performance-optimal mapping and schedule scheme for
dense workloads. LLMCompass also features a cost and area
model based on public parameters to help designers reason
about different design choices.
LLMCompass is validated on three commercial hardware
designs: NVIDIA A100 [46], AMD MI210 [2], and Google
TPUv3 [28], [43]. Compared to real-world hardware, LLMCompass’ estimated latency achieves 10.4% error rate across
various operators with various input sizes and 4.1% error rate
for LLM inference. Implemented in Python, LLMCompass is
still fast. It takes only 15-16 minutes to simulate a 4-A100
GPU node running GPT-3 175B inference, including 26,400
rounds of the mapper’s parameter search (Figure 5i, tested on
one core of Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU @ 3.10GHz).
(2) We leverage LLMCompass to draw architectural
implications and explore how hardware design choices
affect LLM inference (Sec. IV). We find that prefill and
decoding pose different hardware requirements. Prefill can
significantly benefit from more compute capability and buffers,
while decoding barely gains from these and is more sensitive
to memory bandwidth. These insights inspire us to think about
new hardware design paradigms.
(3) We propose two cost-effective hardware designs
different from conventional wisdom (Sec. V). We find that
today’s hardware design paradigms tend to fit massive compute
capability and SRAMs in a huge die connected to high-end
HBMs. We analyze the LLM inference characteristics and
show how current hardware designs are inefficient. ① As LLM
inference is mostly IO-bound, HBMs can be used to achieve
low latency. However, HBM memory capacity limits the batch
size, making it hard to fully utilize the massive compute
capability. Based on this observation, we find that 95.3% of the
original performance can still be achieved even if we prune the
compute capability and buffer size by half. ② Larger batch size
can significantly improve throughput as the model parameters
are only read once for the whole batch. As memory capacity
limits the batch size therefore limiting throughput, we propose

Matmul:W2_proj

AllReduce
FFN

GELU
Feed Forward Network (FFN)
Matmul:W1_proj
LayerNorm - FFN
AllReduce
MHA

Multi Head Attention (MHA)

Matmul:Wo_proj
Softmax

Matmul:A_mul_V

Matmul:Q_mul_K

LayerNorm - MHA

Matmul:Q_K_V

Fig. 2: A Decoder-Only Transformer Layer with Tensor Parallelism. GPT-3 175B [7] consists of a stack of 96 such layers.
to replace HBMs with traditional DRAM. We find that a larger
batch size can compensate for the loss in memory bandwidth
and can bring a 1.42x improvement in throughput and a 3.41x
improvement in performance/cost.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Large Language Models and Transformers
Large Language Models are variations of Transformer models [67] with a considerable amount of parameters that have
been pre-trained on large corpora of data [38]. Today’s LLMs
can have as much as one trillion parameters [16]. Compared to
smaller models, larger models (e.g. GPT-3 175B [7]) showcase
a remarkable set of capabilities such as emergent abilities [71]
and few-shot learning [7]. This increase in model size and
the consequent memory and compute requirements have posed
unique challenges for hardware.
We focus on Decoder-only Transformer models [51], which
is the architecture adopted by most of the LLMs today:
LLaMA [64], GPTs [7], [53], Bloom [73], PaLM [10], etc. The
basic building blocks of these models are Transformer layers.
As illustrated in Figure 2, each layer comprises a Multi-Head
Attention block followed by an MLP block. These layers are
then stacked together, forming the bulk of an LLM’s memory and compute requirement. Transformers also use learned
Vocabulary and Position embeddings, but for large models
like GPT-3, these do not contribute significantly to either
the memory or compute requirement (< 2%). Without losing
generality, we focus on Multi-Head Attention Transformers
(GPT-style). There are other variations such as Multi-Query
Attention [10], Mixture-of-Experts [16], and parallel Attention
and MLP [10]. LLMCompass seamlessly supports all these
possible variations as they share a common set of operators.
B. LLM Inference
Given an input prompt and the required number of output
tokens, LLM inference can be divided into two stages [52].
① Prefill: Processing the input prompt and computing the KV
cache. The Key Value (KV) cache refers to the stored Key
and Value tensors of the Attention block in each layer [52].
② Decoding: Generating output tokens one after another in
an auto-regressive manner: The Key and Value of the newly
generated token will be concatenated to the KV cache and

2

