UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)

Determining the Minimum Number of Virtual Networks for Different Coherence
Protocols
Li, Weihang; Goens, Andrés; Oswald, Nicolai; Nagarajan, Vijay; Sorin, Daniel J.
DOI
10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00023
Publication date
2024
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
License
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act (https://www.openaccess.nl/en/policies/open-access-indutch-copyright-law-taverne-amendment)
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Li, W., Goens, A., Oswald, N., Nagarajan, V., & Sorin, D. J. (2024). Determining the Minimum
Number of Virtual Networks for Different Coherence Protocols. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture: ISCA 2024 : proceedings : 29
June-3 July 2024, Buenos Aires, Argentina (pp. 182-197). IEEE Computer Society.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00023

General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: https://uba.uva.nl/en/contact, or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, P.O. Box 19185, 1000 GD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
You will be contacted as soon as possible.
UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam (https://dare.uva.nl)
Download date:08 Sept 2026

2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00023

2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Determining the Minimum Number of Virtual
Networks for Different Coherence Protocols
Weihang Li

Andrés Goens

Nicolai Oswald

Vijay Nagarajan

Daniel J. Sorin

Duke University
wl252@duke.edu

University of Amsterdam
a.goens@uva.nl

NVIDIA
noswald@nvidia.com

University of Utah
vijay@cs.utah.edu

Duke University
sorin@ee.duke.edu

Abstract—We revisit the question of how many virtual
networks (VNs) are required to provably avoid deadlock in a
cache coherence protocol. The textbook way of reasoning about
VNs says that the number of VNs depends on the longest
chain of message dependencies in the protocol. We show that
this conventional wisdom is incorrect and results in a number
of virtual networks that is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient
for the general system model of an arbitrary interconnection
network (ICN) topology and multiple directories. We have
created a formalism for modeling coherence protocols and their
interactions with ICN queueing. Using that formalism, we have
developed an algorithm that (a) determines the minimum number
of virtual networks required to avoid deadlock and (b) generates
the mappings from message types to virtual networks.

message.1 By assigning different messages to different
VNs, we can ensure that certain messages cannot get
blocked due to being behind other messages in the
same buffer. VNs are the most common approach today.
Indeed, today’s industrial strength speciﬁcations such as
CHI [7], CXL [8], and Tilelink [9] all prescribe VNs for
avoiding coherence deadlocks.
In this paper, we focus on the solution of VNs. We revisit
the question of how many VNs are required to provably
avoid deadlocks, and develop an algorithm that determines
the minimum number of VNs and generates the mappings
from message types to VNs. Since VNs consume a signiﬁcant
amount of the ICN power, it is beneﬁcial to reduce their
number [10]. Note that the minimum number of VNs and
the generated VN mappings solve the problem of protocol
deadlock; these results are orthogonal to the need for virtual
channels to avoid routing deadlock.
The textbook way of reasoning about VNs has been to
group messages into classes and assign each class to its own
VN [11]. The number of these VNs is determined from the
longest chain of messages in the protocol. For example, typical
directory protocols group their messages into three classes:
requests, forwarded requests, and responses. Because a request
can trigger the sending of a forwarded request, and a forwarded
request can trigger the sending of a response, we have a chain
of dependencies: request → forwarded request → response. To
avoid a cyclic dependency, the standard solution is to separate
these message classes and assign each class a VN.
We show that this conventional wisdom is incorrect. The
textbook algorithm for determining VNs results in a number
of virtual networks that is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for
the general system model of an arbitrary ICN topology and
an arbitrary number of directories. We will show examples
of protocols for which the textbook algorithm results in too
few and too many VNs. Having too few VNs can result in
deadlock. Having too many is a waste of router hardware and
power, and it can lead to routers that are slower than they
could be [4].

I. I NTRODUCTION
Multicore processors must ensure that coherence protocol
deadlocks are impossible. A coherence protocol deadlock
can occur due to cyclic dependencies between coherence
messages. For example, a deadlock can occur if caches C1 and
C2 are waiting for responses from each other, but neither will
respond until the other one responds ﬁrst. More complicated
deadlocks can arise through cyclic dependencies that involve
the routers of the interconnection network (ICN).
There are three approaches to avoiding cache coherence
protocol deadlocks. The ﬁrst two have signiﬁcant drawbacks
or obstacles to deployment, which is why the third is the most
commonly used approach.
Use negative acknowledgments (nacks). A protocol can
use nacks to avoid deadlocks (e.g., DASH [1] and
FLASH [2]), but the use of nacks risks livelock and
starvation that are difﬁcult to provably avoid. We do not
consider nacks further in this paper.
• Allow protocol deadlocks and recover from them. There
are several schemes that can detect and recover from
potential deadlocks or periodically drain the ICN to avert
potential deadlocks [3]–[6]. We discuss these approaches
in Section VIII, and explain their advantages as well as
reasons why they are not (yet) widely deployed. The
main limitation of the approach is its complexity and the
difﬁculty of proving that it avoids deadlocks.
• Use virtual networks. Virtual networks (VNs) are simply
dedicated buffers at the ends of physical network links,
where each VN has the capability to buffer at least one
•

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00023

1 Here we distinguish between virtual networks and virtual channels:
whereas the former refers to buffers used to avoid protocol deadlock, the latter
refer to buffers used to avoid routing deadlock. The two concepts compose,
in that a system that requires N virtual networks and C virtual channels,
requires N C distinct buffers at the end of each physical link.

182

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universiteit van Amsterdam. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 10:44:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

