Bosehedral: Compiler Optimization for Bosonic Quantum Computing
Junyu Zhou∗ , Yuhao Liu∗ , Yunong Shi† , Ali Javadi-Abhari‡ and Gushu Li∗
∗ Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA

Email: {junyuzh,liuyuhao,gushuli}@seas.upenn.edu

† AWS Quantum Technology, New York, USA, Email: shiyunon@amazon.com
‡ IBM Quantum, New York, USA, Email: Ali.Javadi@ibm.com

Abstract—Bosonic quantum computing, based on the infinitedimensional qumodes, has shown promise for various practical
applications that are classically hard. However, the lack of
compiler optimizations has hindered its full potential. This paper
introduces Bosehedral, an efficient compiler optimization framework for (Gaussian) Boson sampling on Bosonic quantum hardware. Bosehedral overcomes the challenge of handling infinitedimensional qumode gate matrices by performing all its program
analysis and optimizations at a higher algorithmic level, using
a compact unitary matrix representation. It optimizes qumode
gate decomposition and logical-to-physical qumode mapping, and
introduces a tunable probabilistic gate dropout method. Overall,
Bosehedral significantly improves the performance by accurately
approximating the original program with much fewer gates. Our
evaluation shows that Bosehedral can largely reduce the program
size but still maintain a high approximation fidelity, which
can translate to significant end-to-end application performance
improvement.
Index Terms—Bosonic Quantum Computing, Gaussian Boson
Sampling, Compiler Optimization

z

z

Qubit

Qumode

Fig. 1. Qubit vs Qumode

far behind. Early efforts on programming and compilation
for Bosonic QC, including Strawberry Fields [24], Bosonic
Qiskit [44], and Perceval [35], provide basic programming
interfaces and operation decomposition functions [15, 41] but
miss program optimizations. To summarize, compilation for
Bosonic QC is in its infancy. In contrast to qubit-based QC,
rich libraries of compilation passes [39, 43] are non-existent,
hindering the full exploitation of these computing platforms.
The complexity of devising compiler optimizations for
Bosonic QC arises from the inherent infinite-dimensional
state space of each individual qumode [31]. All the gates
manipulating the state of qumodes, even for a single qumode,
have infinite-dimensional gate matrices. Thus, it is highly
non-trivial for the quantum compiler that runs on a classical
computer to derive equivalent program transformations for
optimization. Traditional techniques employed for quantum
program transformations on qubit-based devices, which rely
on gate matrices, encounter substantial obstacles when confronting the infinite-dimensional qumode gate matrices.
In this paper, we tackle this grand challenge by investigating the compiler optimization in the high-level semantics
of Bosonic QC. Instead of directly handling the infinitedimensional gate matrices applied on the qumode state, the
unique high-level semantics of Bosonic QC allow us to analyze and optimize the program components efficiently and
effectively in a compact data structure. In particular, we focus
on the linear interferometer, the pivotal component containing
most of the gates in a (Gaussian) Boson sampling program
(a widely used Bosonic QC paradigm illustrated in Fig. 2).
A linear interferometer can be considered as a unitary matrix
of size N × N for an N -qumode program without losing any
algorithmic information. All the program transformation and
optimization techniques proposed in this paper can be reasoned
about in the high-level unitary matrix.
To this end, we propose Bosehedral, an effective and efficient compiler optimization framework for (Gaussian) Boson

I. I NTRODUCTION
Bosonic quantum computing, also known as continuousvariable quantum computing [31], is built upon Bosonic
modes. Contrary to qubit-based discrete variable quantum
computing, the basic information processing unit in Bosonic
quantum computing, the qumode, by itself has an infinitedimensional state space (shown in Fig. 1). Bosonic quantum computing (QC) is attractive for multiple reasons: long
lifetimes of qumodes (e.g., superconducting cavities [49]),
the ability to transduce between stationary and flying (e.g.,
photonic) information [37], etc. In particular, Bosonic QC has
strong built-in information encoding and processing capability
to naturally and efficiently encode certain computations, such
as Boson sampling [3] and Gaussian Boson Sampling [20],
with various practical applications [11] (e.g., graph clique [8],
graph similarity [42], point process [22], and molecule vibrational spectra simulation [21]) that are hard for classical
computing. Recently, the quantum advantage [34, 57, 58]
has been experimentally demonstrated on several Bosonic QC
platforms. Several startups are pursuing the commercialization
of Bosonic QC with various technologies [1, 24, 35, 45].
Despite the great hardware progress, the development of
software and compiler optimizations for Bosonic QC is
We thank the anonymous reviewers and shepherd for their constructive
feedback and guidance. We thank Nathan Wiebe and Steven Girvin for
insightful discussions. This work was partially supported by NSF CAREER
Award 2338773, and the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,
National Quantum Information Science Research Centers, Co-design Center
for Quantum Advantage (C2QA) under contract number DE-SC0012704.

1

sampling on Bosonic quantum hardware. In contrast to peephole approximations performed by qubit-based compilers [39,
43], Bosehedral can approximate and simplify circuits at a
large scale by exploiting the global program semantics. First,
Bosehedral optimizes the qumode gate decomposition for
linear interferometers, which can be considered as adjusting
the elimination patterns for different input high-level unitary
matrices to maximize the occurrence of two-qumode gates
with very small rotation angles. These small-angle gates are
functionally akin to the identity and can be safely disregarded
to reduce the gate error with minimal effect on the overall
program semantics. Second, Bosehedral modifies the logicalto-physical qumode mapping, which can be considered as
applying row and column permutations on the high-level
unitary. Bosehedral can find better qumode mapping to further
reduce rotation angles in the compiled two-qumode gates.
The remapping is implemented via re-labeling the physical
qumodes without any execution overhead. Third, Bosehedral comes with a tunable probabilistic gate dropout method
to approximate linear interferometers. Gates with exceedingly
small rotation angles will very likely be dropped, while
gates with rotation angles near the threshold will be dropped
probabilistically to average over the algorithmic approximation
errors. As a result, Bosehedral can approximate (Gaussian)
Boson sampling accurately using considerably fewer gates and
thus substantially enhances the overall performance by largely
mitigating the hardware error effects.
Overall approximation effect reasoning One key advantage of Bosehedral is that it can easily reason about
the overall effect of the approximation during compilation
time. After the gate decomposition and dropout, the global
high-level semantics of the approximated program can be
reconstructed by reversing the elimination process on the highlevel unitary matrix. This is hard to achieve in the qubit-based
approximation compilations because they usually rely on the
unscalable low-level gate semantics and the gate matrices are
exponentially large as the number of qubits increases.
Our experimental results show that Bosehedral can reduce
gate by ∼ 25% to 40% but maintain program fidelity of ∼ 98%
to 99.9% for various benchmarks and underlying architectures.
Compared with the baseline Strawberry Fields [24], the divergence between the sampled output distribution in noisy
simulation and the ideal output distribution is reduced by
26.1% on average, which translates to significant end-to-end
application performance improvement as demonstrated in our
detailed application studies.
Our major contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We proposed Bosehedral, the first efficient and effective
compiler optimization framework for (Gaussian) Boson
sampling in Bosonic quantum computing.
2) Bosehedral overcomes the challenges of infinitedimensional gate matrices by performing program analysis and compiler optimization at a high-level representation.
3) We proposed several compiler optimization algorithms
for qumode gate decomposition, logical-to-physical

qumode mapping, and probabilistic gate dropout for
program simplification.
4) Our evaluation shows that Bosehedral can outperforms
baseline Bosonic quantum compilers by significantly
improving the execution fidelity and the end-to-end
application performance for various benchmarks and
architectures.
II. B OSONIC Q UANTUM C OMPUTING
This section introduces the necessary background on
Bosonic quantum computing. We recommend [31, 50] for
more comprehensive introductions.
A. Infinite-Dimensional Quantum Information Processing
In discrete variable quantum computing, the basic information processing unit is a qubit, whose state lies in a twodimensional Hilbert space spanned by two basis states |0⟩ and
|1⟩. In contrast, in Bosonic quantum computing, also known
as the continuous-variable quantum computing, the basic information processing unit is a quantum mode or qumode.
Its state lies in infinite-dimensional Hilbert space spanned
by the Fock basis: {|n⟩}∞
n=0 . In literature, this infinite-level
system is usually called a Bosonic mode and the corresponding
quantum computing paradigm is called the Bosonic quantum
computing [31, 50].
To understand how the states of Bosonic qumodes are
manipulated, we first introduce the ladder operators, including
the annihilation operator and creation operator, in the system
state Hilbert space. For the k-th qumode, the annihilation
operator âk and the creation operator â†k are defined as follows:
√
for n ≥ 1
âk |n⟩k = n|n − 1⟩k
√
for n ≥ 0
â†k |n⟩k = n + 1|n + 1⟩k
and âk |0⟩ = 0. For an N -qumode system, we have the
following operator vectors:
â = (â1 , â2 , . . . , âN )⊺ , â† = (â†1 , â†2 , . . . , â†N )⊺
Qumode gates are usually defined with the âk ’s and
â†k ’s. Some common qumode gates used in this paper are
listed in Fig. 2 and introduced in the following. Squeezing
Gate is a single-qumode gate denoted by ‘S’. A squeezing
gate applied on the 
k-th qumode is defined as: S(α) =
exp 12 (α∗ â2k − αâ†2
)
, where α ∈ C. Phase Shifter is a
k
single-qumode gate denoted by ‘R’. A phase shifter applied
on the k-th qumode is defined as: R(φ) = exp(iφâ†k âk ), where
φ ∈ R. Beamsplitter is a two-qumode gate denoted by ‘BS’.
A Beamsplitter applied
is defined
 on the k-th and l-th qumodes

as: BS(θ, φ) = exp θ(eiφ âk â†l − e−iφ â†k âl ) , where φ and
θ ∈ R. Displacement is a single-qumode gate denoted by ‘D’.
A displacement gate applied on the k-th qumode is defined as:
D(α) = exp(αâ†k − α∗ âk ), where α ∈ C. Note that all these
gates have infinitely-large gate matrices as all âk s and â†k s are
infinite-dimensional.
Compared with Finite-Dimensional Quantum Information Processing Qumodes are very different from three-

2

