FireAxe: Partitioned FPGA-Accelerated Simulation
of Large-Scale RTL Designs
Joonho Whangbo

Edwin Lim

Chengyi Lux Zhang

Kevin Anderson

UC Berkeley
joonho.whangbo@berkeley.edu

CMU
eglim@andrew.cmu.edu

UC Berkeley
iansseijelly@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
kevinand@berkeley.edu

Abraham Gonzalez

Raghav Gupta

Nivedha Krishnakumar

Sagar Karandikar

UC Berkeley
abe.gonzalez@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
raghavgupta@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
nivedha@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
sagark@eecs.berkeley.edu

Borivoje Nikolić

Yakun Sophia Shao

Krste Asanović

UC Berkeley
bora@eecs.berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
ysshao@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley
krste@berkeley.edu

Abstract—Pre-silicon validation and end-to-end system evaluation are integral parts of hardware development as they provide
architects with insights about the complex interactions between
various hardware components, system software, and application
code. Although this process can be accelerated using FPGAs as
a simulation host, existing platforms fall short when the resource
requirements of a custom hardware design exceed a single FPGA.
We present FireAxe, an open-source FPGA-accelerated RTL
simulation platform that supports push-button user-guided partitioning across multiple FPGAs, using a compiler called FireRipper. Given a partition point, FireRipper automatically maps a
monolithic RTL design onto multiple FPGAs while providing
hardware designers quick feedback about the partition interface
and expected simulation performance. Furthermore, FireRipper
enables users to choose between an exact-mode which provides
cycle-exact results with RTL-level fidelity, or a fast-mode that
improves simulation rate while sacrificing fidelity only at the
partition boundary. Built on FireSim, FireAxe preserves the
ability to elastically scale simulations from on-premises FPGAs
to cloud FPGAs. For example, pulling out a core from a systemon-chip (SoC) onto a separate FPGA, we achieve simulation rates
of 1.6 MHz using on-premises FPGAs connected by direct-attach
cables and 1 MHz on AWS F1 FPGAs using peer-to-peer PCIe.
To show FireAxe’s ability to enable pre-silicon performance
validation at unprecedented scale, we show several case studies.
First, we replicate full-stack system-level effects such as latency
spikes from garbage collection in a Golang application on an SoC
containing 4 out-of-order (OoO) cores. We also boot Linux on, to
our knowledge, the largest OoO core ever cycle-exactly simulated
in academia. Lastly, we simulate a system-on-chip containing
24 OoO cores mapped onto five datacenter-class FPGAs. We
discover an RTL bug when trying to run Linux user-space
applications that did not appear with less substantial software
stacks. This was discovered in less than 2 hours using FireAxe
and would have taken weeks in a commercial software RTL
simulator.
Index Terms—computer simulation, RTL simulation, FPGAs,
performance analysis, computer architecture, scalability

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ever increasing demands of sophisticated applications
from the edge to the cloud is driving the design of increasingly

complex systems with larger die sizes in advanced technologies. Designing hardware at this scale is challenging due to
the long turnaround times of capturing end-to-end system-level
performance metrics, among many other design verification
and validation tasks. While performance evaluation of a single
module can quickly provide performance results in isolation,
system-level performance validation, where the module is
added into the full design, is required to measure realistic
performance metrics.
Traditionally, abstract simulators have addressed this problem by providing a balance between simulation performance,
fidelity, and flexibility. However, using abstract simulators is
challenging due to the increasing amount of specialization in
modern hardware designs. This is due to the fact that abstract
simulators require validation, which is challenging without an
RTL source-of-truth. Given an RTL source of truth, previous
work such as FireSim [19] has enabled cycle-exact1 simulation
at 10s to 100s of MHz. This enabled architects to run realistic
benchmarks and obtain high-fidelity results but requires that
the design fits in a single FPGA.
In this work, we present FireAxe, an open-source2 FPGAaccelerated RTL simulation framework built on FireSim that
performs push-button user-guided partitioning of arbitrary
hardware designs (e.g., a system on chip) across multiple
FPGAs, using a compiler called FireRipper. FireRipper automatically partitions the design by extracting the user-specified
modules into separate FPGA partitions while providing users
quick feedback about the partition interface and expected
simulation performance. In addition, it supports two modes
that users can choose from: an exact-mode that provides cycleexact simulation results with full RTL-level fidelity, or a fast1 Cycle-exact means that the cycle numbers obtained by FireSim will be
identical to the numbers obtained by running the same workload on a tapedout chip built from the same RTL.
2 This will be open-source/upstreamed to FireSim (docs: https://fires.im/
github: https://github.com/firesim/firesim).

mode that provides higher simulation performance by sacrificing simulation fidelity only at the partition boundary. FireAxe
supports both on-premises and cloud FPGA platforms such as
AWS EC2 F1, preserving FireSim’s ability to run large-scale
simulations without paying the upfront cost of purchasing
FPGAs. On AWS EC2 F1 instances, the communication
between FPGAs occurs directly between FPGAs using peer-topeer PCIe, reaching up to 1 MHz target simulation frequency.
In on-premises settings, FPGA-to-FPGA communication is
achieved by cheap (∼$25), off-the-shelf QSFP cables, which
enables a target simulation frequency of up to 1.6 MHz.
Lastly, to the best of our knowledge, FireAxe is the first
work to identify the synergy of multithreaded simulation and
partitioning, which can be used to amortize the inter-FPGA
communication latency in cases when there are duplicate
modules within the target hardware.
To demonstrate the capabilities of FireAxe, we perform a
number of case studies. First, we simulate an SoC with 24
out-of-order (OoO) cores connected in a ring topology, by partitioning the SoC across five Xilinx Alveo U250 FPGAs [29]
and find an RTL bug three billion cycles into the simulation.
Simulating this SoC with FireAxe enabled us to discover the
RTL bug in less than two hours. Attempting to find this bug in
software RTL simulation would have been impractical, given
that a commercial software RTL simulator would have taken
weeks to reach the bug.
Next, to show the flexibility of FireRipper as well as the
new microarchitectural design space that can be explored,
we model an OoO core (synthesis area of 1.56mm2 in a
commercial 16nm technology) that does not fit in a single
Xilinx Alveo U250 FPGA. We split the core in half, with the
core’s backend (register renaming, physical register file, execution units) and load-store-units on one FPGA while placing
the core’s frontend (instruction fetch, branch prediction, fetch
buffer) and the memory subsystem on another FPGA. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the largest OoO core ever cycleexactly simulated in academia.
Finally, to demonstrate that FireAxe can be used to capture
complex interactions between the application, system software,
and hardware pre-silicon, we reproduce two effects that can
only be observed in a full-system multi-core SoC simulation.
To investigate the microarchitecture-level interactions between
cores, caches, buses, and a network interface controller (NIC),
we study how scaling the number of cores (up to 12) affects the
leaky-DMA problem [15]. In addition, we reproduce latency
spikes induced by garbage collection for the Go programming
language [23] by simulating an SoC containing four OoO
cores.
II. BACKGROUND
FPGA-based simulators require decoupling the simulated
target design’s clock from the host-FPGA clock to obtain
accurate performance results. In this section, we explain how
LI-BDNs are used to achieve host-clock decoupling, and
review FireSim [19], an FPGA-accelerated simulator that uses
LI-BDNs to obtain cycle-exact simulation results.

Input
Channels

Output
Channels

V
D
R
V
D
R

oFSM

fireFSM

oFSM

Fig. 1: LI-BDN. The solid lines indicate the original circuit
while the dotted lines are extra circuitry added to generate the
LI-BDN.
A. LI-BDNs
Directly emulating ASIC RTL on an FPGA leads to incorrect performance measurements due to the mismatch in
FPGA frequency and taped-out ASIC frequency. For instance,
an ASIC design targeting 1 GHz experiences 100 cycles of
DRAM access latency when the backing DRAM latency is
100ns. However, if that unmodified RTL is mapped to an
FPGA at 100 MHz with the same backing DRAM attached to
the FPGA, then the DRAM access latency will be reduced to
10 cycles, resulting in inaccurate performance measurements.
To solve this, latency-insensitive bounded dataflow networks
(LI-BDN) [24] are used to decouple the target design’s clock
from the host FPGA clock by controlling when the target
design can advance a cycle. From this point on, we refer to
the ASIC RTL that is being simulated as the target design,
while we refer to the platform that runs the simulation as the
host.
Figure 1 is an LI-BDN where the solid lines represent
the original target design and the dotted lines represent extra
circuitry which controls when the target design can advance
a cycle. The inputs and outputs of the target design interface
with latency-insensitive channel queues that hold tokens or
the data to be sent to/from the target design. Each output
channel has a single-bit finite-state-machine (FSM) that waits
until all the combinationally connected input channels have a
valid token. When valid tokens are present, an output token is
enqueued into the corresponding output channel. Furthermore,
another FSM (fireFSM in Figure 1) advances a cycle when
all the input channels have a valid token and all the outputs
have fired or are firing. While advancing a cycle, all the input
tokens are dequeued and the output FSMs are initialized.
B. FireSim
FireSim [19] is an example of applying this form of decoupling. FireSim is an open-source, FPGA-accelerated, cycleexact hardware simulation platform that enables simulating
RTL designs on FPGAs at 10s to 100s of MHz. FireSim contains a compiler called Golden Gate (GG) [20] that operates
on FIRRTL [18]. FIRRTL is an intermediate representation
(IR) for digital circuits. A FIRRTL description of a design

