Constable: Improving Performance and Power Efficiency
by Safely Eliminating Load Instruction Execution
*Rahul Bera1 *Adithya Ranganathan2 Joydeep Rakshit2 Sujit Mahto2
Anant V. Nori2 Jayesh Gaur2 Ataberk Olgun1 Konstantinos Kanellopoulos1
Mohammad Sadrosadati1 Sreenivas Subramoney2 Onur Mutlu1

arXiv:2406.18786v1 [cs.AR] 26 Jun 2024

1

ETH Zürich

2

Intel Processor Architecture Research Lab
stall for multiple cycles, which can limit ILP. On the other
hand, a load instruction consumes multiple hard-to-scale hardware resources (e.g., reservation station entry, port to address
generation unit, L1-data cache read port) which often causes
resource dependence in the pipeline, also limiting ILP.
Prior works propose many latency tolerance techniques to
improve ILP by mitigating load data dependence. Load Value
Prediction (LVP) [32,42,43,71,98,107,114,139–143,151,153–155,
159, 160] and Memory Renaming (MRN) [120, 121, 147, 177, 178]
are two such widely-studied techniques that mitigate load
data dependence via data value speculation. LVP and MRN
speculatively execute load-data-dependent instructions using
the predicted value of the load instruction, thus improving ILP.

Load instructions often limit instruction-level parallelism (ILP)
in modern processors due to data and resource dependences they
cause. Prior techniques like Load Value Prediction (LVP) and
Memory Renaming (MRN) mitigate load data dependence by
predicting the data value of a load instruction. However, they
fail to mitigate load resource dependence as the predicted load instruction gets executed nonetheless (even on a correct prediction),
which consumes hard-to-scale pipeline resources that otherwise
could have been used to execute other load instructions.
Our goal in this work is to improve ILP by mitigating both
load data dependence and resource dependence. To this end, we
propose a purely-microarchitectural technique called Constable, that safely eliminates the execution of load instructions.
Constable dynamically identifies load instructions that have repeatedly fetched the same data from the same load address. We
call such loads likely-stable. For every likely-stable load, Constable (1) tracks modifications to its source architectural registers
and memory location via lightweight hardware structures, and
(2) eliminates the execution of subsequent instances of the load
instruction until there is a write to its source register or a store or
snoop request to its load address.
Our extensive evaluation using a wide variety of 90 workloads
shows that Constable improves performance by 5.1% while reducing the core dynamic power consumption by 3.4% on average
over a strong baseline system that implements MRN and other dynamic instruction optimizations (e.g., move and zero elimination,
constant and branch folding). In presence of 2-way simultaneous
multithreading (SMT), Constable’s performance improvement
increases to 8.8% over the baseline system. When combined with
a state-of-the-art load value predictor (EVES), Constable provides
an additional 3.7% and 7.8% average performance benefit over
the load value predictor alone, in the baseline system without
and with 2-way SMT, respectively.

Key limitation. Even though LVP and MRN provide performance benefits by breaking load data dependence, the predicted load instruction still needs to be executed nonetheless
to verify the speculated load value, which takes hard-to-scale
hardware resources that otherwise could have been utilized
for executing other load instructions. In other words, LVP
and MRN provide performance benefits by mitigating load
data dependence, but they do not mitigate load resource dependence, which leaves a significant performance and power
consumption improvement opportunity on the table (see §4.4).
Our goal in this work is to improve ILP by mitigating both
load data dependence and resource dependence. To this end,
we propose a lightweight, purely-microarchitectural technique
called Constable, which safely eliminates the entire execution
of a load instruction (i.e., both load address computation and
data fetch from memory hierarchy).
The key insight behind Constable is that a dynamic load
instance I2 of a static load instruction I is bound to fetch the
same value from the same memory location as the previous
dynamic instance I1 of the same static load instruction when
the following two conditions are satisfied.
• Condition 1: None of the source registers of I has been
written between the occurrences of I1 and I2 .
• Condition 2: No store or snoop request has arrived to the
memory address of I1 between the occurrences of I1 and I2 .
Satisfying Condition 1 ensures that I2 would have the same
load address as I1 , and thus the address computation operation
of I2 can be safely eliminated. Satisfying Condition 2 ensures
that I2 would fetch the same value from the memory as I1 , and
thus the data fetch operation of I2 can be safely eliminated.

1. Introduction
Extracting high instruction-level parallelism (ILP) [66, 146] is
essential for designing high-performance processors. However, ILP often gets limited by data dependence (i.e., the result of one instruction would be consumed by the other) and
resource dependence (i.e., two or more instructions contending for the same limited hardware resource) between instructions [97, 137, 165, 176]. Load instructions are a major source
of ILP limitation in modern workloads due to both data dependence and resource dependence [27]. On the one hand,
a load instruction typically takes longer latency to execute
than most non-memory instructions since a load performs two
component operations: (1) compute the load address, and (2)
fetch the data by accessing the memory hierarchy. As a result, the instructions that depend on the load instruction often

Key mechanism. Constable exploits this key insight to safely
eliminate executing a load instruction while breaking load
data dependence in two key steps. First, Constable dynamically identifies load instructions that have repeatedly fetched
the same data value from the same load address. We call such

*Rahul Bera and Adithya Ranganathan are co-primary authors.

1

loads likely-stable.1 Second, when Constable gains enough
confidence that a given load instruction is likely-stable, Constable tracks modifications to the source architectural registers
the load instruction and its memory location via two small
hardware structures. Constable eliminates the execution of
all future instances of the likely-stable load and breaks the
load data dependence using the last-fetched value of the load
instruction, until there is a write to its source registers or a
store or snoop request to its load address.
Key results. We evaluate Constable using a diverse set of
90 workloads (which includes all workloads from SPEC CPU
2017 [17] suite and many well-known Client, Enterprise,
and Server workloads) over a strong 6-wide superscalar baseline processor that already implements Memory Renaming and
various other dynamic instruction optimizations like zero elimination [68], move elimination [64,68], constant folding [64,68],
and branch folding [60]. Our evaluation yields five key results
that show Constable’s effectiveness. First, Constable improves
performance on average by (up to) 5.1% (31.2%) over the baseline, while reducing the core dynamic power consumption by
3.4% (24.6%). Second, when combined with a state-of-the-art
value predictor (EVES [155]), Constable improves performance
by 8.5% on average over the baseline, which is 3.7% more
performance than EVES alone. Third, in a 2-way simultaneous multithreading [62] configuration, (a) Constable alone
improves performance on average by 8.8% over the baseline,
and (b) Constable combined with EVES outperforms EVES
alone by 7.8% on average. Fourth, by eliminating both address
computation and data fetch component of load execution, Constable reduces the reservation station allocations and L1-data
cache accesses by 8.8% and 26%, respectively, which results
in dynamic power savings. Fifth, Constable’s benefits come at
a modest storage overhead of only 12.4 KB per core.
We make the following key contributions in this work:
• We show that a significant fraction (on average by 34.2%
and up to 68.3%) of all dynamic loads repeatedly fetch the
same value from the same memory address across the entire
workload. By analyzing the disassembly of fully-optimized
workload binaries, we show that even a state-of-the-art
compiler with full optimization often fails to optimize such
load instructions at compile time due to various empiricallyobserved reasons, e.g., accessing runtime constants and accessing local variables in inlined functions (see §4.1).
• We show that ideally eliminating the execution of such load
instructions while breaking their load data dependence has
more than twice the performance headroom (9.1% on average) than breaking only load data dependence via ideal load
value prediction (4.3% on average). This performance gap
demonstrates the opportunity to improve ILP by mitigating
load resource dependence (see §4.4).
• We propose Constable, a microarchitectural technique that
dynamically identifies load instructions that repeatedly fetch
the same data from the same address using a confidencebased mechanism and eliminates the execution of such instructions by tracking modifications to their source registers
and store and snoop requests to their addresses (see §5).
• We propose a practical, lightweight microarchitecture for
Constable that safely eliminates load execution in the presence of aggressive out-of-order load issue in modern multi-

core processors (see §6).
• We extensively verify the correctness of Constable by matching the outcome of every instruction in microarchitectural
simulation with that in functional simulation over a large
suite of 3400 traces (see §8.5).
• We show that Constable improves performance by 5.1% on
average (see §9.1.1) while reducing the core dynamic power
consumption by 3.4% (see §9.5) and incurring a modest storage overhead of only 12.4 KB over a strong superscalar processor that implements various dynamic instruction optimizations. Constable’s benefits further increase in presence
of simultaneous multithreading (see §9.1.2).
• We open-source a binary instrumentation tool that we
use to identify load instructions that repeatedly fetch the
same value from the same memory address in any off-theself x86-64 binary in https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/
Load-Inspector (see §4.2).

2. Background
Extracting high instruction-level parallelism (ILP) [66, 146] is
essential in providing high single-thread and multi-thread performance in modern processors [80,94,172]. Unfortunately, ILP
often gets limited by data dependence and resource dependence
between instructions [27, 97, 137, 165, 176].2 Data dependence
limits ILP due to data flow (communications) between instructions, whereas resource dependence (also called structural dependence) limits ILP due to contention for limited hardware
resources in the system (e.g., execution unit, load port).
Load instructions are a major source of ILP limitation in modern workloads due to both data and resource dependence [27].
Load instructions typically have longer latency than most
non-memory instructions since they perform multiple component operations in a single instruction. Fig. 1 shows the
two key component operations of a load instruction’s execution in a traditional nine-stage out-of-order (OOO) processor
pipeline [79, 137]. The processor first computes the load address of an issued load instruction in the execute stage of the
pipeline. The processor then fetches the data by accessing the
memory hierarchy in the memory stage, which may require
accessing the lower levels of memory hierarchy (e.g., the main
memory). As a result, the dependents of a load instruction
often stall for several cycles, thus significantly limiting ILP.
In-order

Fetch

Decode

Rename

In-order

Out-of-order

Allocate

Issue

Execute

Memory

Writeback

Retire

Component operations:

Compute
e0fective load address

Fetch data
from memory hierarchy

Hardware resources:

RS entry, AGU port

Load port to L1-D cache

Figure 1: Two component operations of a load instruction execution and their associated pipeline resources.

A load instruction also uses several key hardware resources
during its execution. As shown in Fig. 1, a load instruction
consumes (1) a reservation station (RS) entry and an address
generation unit (AGU) port to compute its load address, and (2)
a load port to the L1-data (L1-D) cache to fetch the data from
the memory hierarchy. Many of these hardware resources are
hard to scale due to their non-trivial area and power overheads.
As a result, a load instruction often causes resource dependence
in the pipeline, thus limiting ILP.

1 Hence the name Constable, that polices the likely-stable loads to safely

2 ILP also gets limited by frequent control dependence [137,138,176], which

eliminate them.

is outside the scope of this work.

2

