Realizing the AMD Exascale Heterogeneous Processor Vision
Industry Product

Alan Smith, Gabriel H. Loh, Michael J. Schulte, Mike Ignatowski, Samuel Naffziger, Mike Mantor, Mark Fowler
Nathan Kalyanasundharam, Vamsi Alla, Nicholas Malaya, Joseph L. Greathouse, Eric Chapman, Raja Swaminathan
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
Abstract – AMD had previously detailed its exascale research
journey from initial targets and requirements to the development and evolution of its vision of a high-performance computing (HPC) accelerated processing unit (APU), dubbed the Exascale Heterogeneous Processor or EHP. At the conclusion of
that work, the learnings were integrated into the design of the
node architecture that went into the Frontier supercomputer,
the world’s first exascale machine. However, while the Frontier
node architecture embodied many of the attributes of the EHP
concept, advanced heterogeneous integration capabilities at the
time were not yet sufficiently mature to realize our vision of a
fully-integrated APU for HPC and AI. In this paper, we finish
the EHP’s story by digging deeper into why an APU was not the
right solution at the time of our first exascale architecture, what
the shortcomings were of previous EHP concepts, and how
AMD further evolved the concept into the AMD Instinct™
MI300A APU. MI300A is the culmination of years of AMD developments in advanced packaging technologies, its APU hardware and software, and the next step in our highly effective
chiplet strategy to not only deliver a groundbreaking design for
exascale computing, but to also meet the demands of new largelanguage model and generative AI applications.

I. INTRODUCTION
Over a decade ago, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
created an ambitious set of goals to guide their exascale
program [7]. In particular, the DOE was concerned that
technical challenges like the end of Moore’s Law [23] and
Dennard scaling [9], power consumption, the memory wall
[43], and reliability at scale could significantly delay the
introduction of exascale-class supercomputers. The DOE
administered a series of advanced research public-private
partnerships to enable and accelerate the pre-exascale
research needed to achieve exascale compute capabilities.
AMD was selected to participate in these research
programs. Key aspects of our exascale research vision and
how they evolved and ultimately led to the world’s first
exascale supercomputer, Frontier at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory [28][29][30], were detailed in our ISCA 2023
Industry Track paper [22]. In particular, our research vision
proposed the “Exascale Heterogeneous Processor” (EHP), a
high-performance accelerated processing unit (APU)
consisting of CPU and GPU compute along with multiple
stacks of high-bandwidth memory (HBM) and other systemon-a-chip (SoC) components all integrated into a single
physical processor package. For a variety of factors to be
discussed in this paper, what was ultimately deployed in the
Frontier supercomputer’s node architecture had a logical
organization that reflected many of the key architectural
attributes of the EHP, but was constructed out of separate,
discrete packages.
*This paper is part of the Industry Track of ISCA 2024's program

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory announced that
their upcoming El Capitan supercomputer will utilize AMD
Instinct™ MI300A APUs [37]. The MI300A APU represents
the realization and embodiment of the original EHP concept,
combining compute and memory components in a single
advanced package. This paper provides an inside view into:
why AMD did not initially pursue the EHP in the first
generation exascale machine; remaining challenges with the
original EHP concept; technical details of the AMD MI300A
APU and how it ultimately surpasses the EHP; and the
evolution of the AMD chiplet strategy into a modular 3D
chiplet platform that also enables the AMD Instinct™
MI300X accelerator for targeting the rapid explosion in
computational demands for machine learning (ML) largelanguage models (LLM) and generative AI workloads.
II. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
This section provides a brief review of the AMD EHP concept to provide the necessary context for Section III, where
we discuss why the EHP was not utilized in the first generation AMD exascale approach. For the full story of the development of the original EHP and the Frontier supercomputer,
we refer the reader to our previous retrospective paper [22].
A. EHP Overview
Our original EHP research concepts changed through several different incarnations based on evolving information
over time about technology capabilities and limitations,
alignment with product roadmaps, and overall project performance and power targets. An APU is attractive for HPC supercomputer scenarios because the GPU components provide
very high computational throughput per Watt and per unit
volume (m3) to maximize performance within the constraints
of datacenter compute density and power consumption limits.
The CPU components are still critical for code sections that
are irregular or otherwise difficult to parallelize on the GPU
(Amdahl’s Law must still be reckoned with), as well as in the
dispatch and orchestration of GPU compute tasks. Co-packaging the CPU and GPU can also reduce data movement latencies, improve bandwidth between components, and improve synchronization and coordination overheads. The EHP
also proposed using in-package HBM, which enables “zero
copy” memory allocation and management between the CPU
and GPU. The CPU can initialize data directly in the HBM,
and then kernels dispatched to the GPU can likewise directly
access the same physical memory without explicitly copying
the data from host to device memory as is typically needed
when the CPU and GPU are implemented in discrete packages. Beyond the performance and power benefits of avoiding the data copies, this unified shared memory architecture
also provides programmability benefits, as users are now

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. © 2024 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
This is the author's version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in ISCA’24,

Figure 1. (a) “Version 3” of the Exascale Heterogeneous Processor
(EHP) concept from the AMD pre-exascale research explorations [42],
and (b) “Version 4” of the EHP [22].

freed from orchestrating the data copies from the CPU to the
GPU and back. Placing everything in the same package also
introduces new opportunities to dynamically shift power between the components based on workload characteristics.
Figure 1(a) shows “version 3” of the EHP (EHPv3), which
included the use of active silicon interposers 3D-stacked with
compute chiplets and high-bandwidth memory (HBM)
[20][31][42]. The main reason for the aggressive use of stacking in this concept was to maximize the total compute and
memory within the processor package. Due to the projected
technologies that would be sufficiently mature for high-volume manufacturing in the timeframe of our first exascale architecture, our final “version 4” of the EHP (EHPv4), shown
in Figure 1(b), backed away from a 3D-stacked approach and
instead relied on 2D chiplets on an organic substrate [27]
combined with 2.5D passive silicon interposer integration [12]
of the GPU and HBM. EHPv4 still maintained the key attributes of combining CPU, GPU, and HBM in a single package,
but it was less aggressive in terms of its use of advanced integration and packaging technologies compared to EHPv3.
B. Frontier Node Architecture Overview
For a variety of factors to be discussed in Section III, the
node architecture used in the Frontier supercomputer did not
utilize an APU. Figure 2 shows the actual node architecture
consisting of a CPU and four discrete GPU accelerators
connected with AMD Infinity Fabric™ coherent interconnect
[30][32]. As discussed in our prior retrospective paper [22],
the underlying components of the Frontier node architecture,
which has been widely deployed in several other
supercomputers and datacenters [23], effectively consist of
four instances of the EHP conjoined by a common I/O die
(IOD). For example, the components within each of the four
different-colored boxes in Figure 2 consist of two CPU
chiplets, two large GPU die, and eight stacks of HBM, which
match the compute and memory components of one EHPv4.
A flat memory address space with cache coherence between
the CPU and GPU portions enabled an APU-like view of the
different components: architecturally unified although
implemented in physically distinct packages.

Figure 2. The Frontier Node Architecture’s compute components.

C. Dawn of the Modern ML Era
At the start of the exascale program, the focus was on HPC
and scientific computing. During this decade of research
leading up to our first exascale architecture, the industry
witnessed the explosion of the modern ML revolution. This
created new requirements for our products, and AMD
evolved our vision to devise a solution to provide world-class
performance and power efficiency for both HPC and ML.
There are many common requirements between HPC and ML,
in particular very high memory bandwidth and compute
throughput. However, ML also brings new requirements like
lower-precision arithmetic not traditionally emphasized in
HPC and greater memory capacity to hold growing model
sizes, although there is now also significant activity toward
adopting ML techniques for HPC use cases [34]. The market
demand for world-class ML products steered the AMD
strategy for its second generation exascale plans to support
both sets of market needs. This necessitated taking the AMD
chiplet strategy to new levels of 3D modularity.
III. EHP: ALMOST THERE, BUT NOT QUITE
We first provide some retrospective insights into why
AMD did not pursue building either EHPv3 or EHPv4 for the
Frontier supercomputer. The overall vision for an HPC APU
was and remains technically sound, but the industry’s heterogeneous integration capabilities at the time were not yet sufficiently mature to support high-volume productization of our
exascale APU concepts. This section also sets the stage for
understanding our approach for the MI300A processor.
A. Aggressive Technology Needs for EHPv3
In some ways, EHPv3 was more desirable compared to
EHPv4 due to its significantly higher levels of integration
density. While AMD has been successfully utilizing hybridbonding 3D stacking [14] in its CPU products enhanced with
V-Cache™ technology, EHPv3’s stacking is significantly
more aggressive than our V-Cache products.

