HEAP: A Fully Homomorphic Encryption
Accelerator with Parallelized Bootstrapping
Rashmi Agrawal∗ , Anantha Chandrakasan† , Ajay Joshi∗
∗ Boston University, † MIT

{rashmi23, joshi}@bu.edu, anantha@mit.edu
Abstract—Fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) is a cryptographic
technology with the potential to revolutionize data privacy by enabling
computation on encrypted data. Lately, the CKKS FHE scheme has
become quite popular because it can process real numbers. However,
CKKS computing is not pervasive yet because it is resource-intensive
both in terms of compute and memory, and is multiple orders
of magnitude slower than computing on unencrypted data. The
recent algorithmic and hardware optimizations to accelerate CKKS
computing are promising, but CKKS computing continues to
underperform due to an expensive operation known as bootstrapping.
While there have been several efforts to accelerate bootstrapping,
it continues to remain the main performance bottleneck. One of
the reasons for this performance bottleneck is that unlike the nonbootstrapping parts of CKKS computing the bootstrapping algorithm
is inherently sequential and exhibits interdependencies among the data.
To address this challenge, in this paper, we introduce HEAP an
accelerator that uses a hybrid scheme-switching approach. HEAP
uses the CKKS scheme for the non-bootstrapping steps, but switches
to the TFHE scheme when performing the bootstrapping step of the
CKKS scheme. The hybrid approach transitions to the TFHE scheme
by extracting coefficients from a single RLWE ciphertext to represent
multiple LWE ciphertexts. We incorporate the bootstrapping function
into the TFHE BlindRotate operation and simultaneously apply
the BlindRotate operation to all LWE ciphertexts. A parallelized
execution of bootstrapping is then feasible because there are no data
dependencies between distinct LWE ciphertexts. With our approach,
we require smaller-sized bootstrapping keys leading to about 18×
less amount of data to be read from the main memory for the keys. In
addition, we introduce a variety of hardware optimizations in HEAP—
from modular arithmetic level to NTT and BlindRotate datapath
optimizations. The approach in HEAP is agnostic of the hardware and
can be mapped to any system with multiple compute nodes. To evaluate
HEAP, we implemented it in RTL and mapped it to a single FPGA
system and an eight-FPGA system. Our comprehensive evaluation of
HEAP for the bootstrapping operation shows a 15.39× improvement
when compared to FAB. Similarly, evaluation of HEAP for the logistic
regression model training shows 14.71× and 11.57× improvement
when compared to FAB and FAB-2 implementations, respectively.
Index Terms—CKKS, TFHE, scheme switching, bootstrapping,
FPGA acceleration

I. INTRODUCTION
With the growing dependence on large-scale data to make
business decisions, businesses are commonly using cloud services
to process their data. As a result, cloud environments have become
attractive targets for attacks. Data breaches during processing
have become quite common these days. In fact, in 2022 alone
there were more than 1800 data breaches in the cloud during data
processing [32]. So there is a critical need to provide data security
and privacy in the cloud when processing the data.
Over the past decade, fully homomorphic encryption (FHE)
[24] has emerged as one of the plausible ways to enforce privacy
during processing by enabling computing on encrypted data. Even
though FHE provides strong data privacy guarantees, it is not yet

widely adopted. This is because computing on encrypted data using
FHE is inherently slow due to its compute and memory-intensive
nature [21], [27], [54]. This is true irrespective of the FHE
scheme [9], [15], [16], [26] used in practice.
Out of the currently available FHE schemes, the CKKS FHE
scheme can handle computations on real numbers. Given the
extensive use of real numbers in machine learning training and
inference and the pervasiveness of machine learning (ML)-based
applications today and in the foreseeable future, the CKKS scheme
is currently the most popular. While the CKKS scheme can support
the “deep” ML models, to be able to do that we need to perform
an expensive operation known as bootstrapping. This bootstrapping
operation, depending upon the scheme parameters, can take several
seconds to several minutes [27].
While all the recent algorithmic [1], [10], [30], software [6],
[34], [51], and hardware [2], [36]–[38], [49], [50] optimizations
to the CKKS primitive and bootstrapping operations have helped
reduce the bootstrapping execution time, bootstrapping still remains
a performance bottleneck as it consumes up to 95% of the total
application execution time [34], [36]. This underscores the critical
need for accelerating bootstrapping. The state-of-the-art CKKS
bootstrapping algorithm is inherently serial and does not scale well
to multiple CPUs/GPUs/FPGAs with all the data dependencies
within a single RLWE ciphertext. One of the recent works FAB [2]
observed only 20% improvement in application performance
when mapping the solution to multiple FPGAs. The performance
improvement was limited by the bootstrapping implementation,
which could not be parallelized.
In this work, we propose HEAP which uses a hybrid schemeswitching approach that uses a combination of CKKS and TFHE
schemes. The core idea is to perform the non-bootstrapping
operations using the CKKS primitives and switch to the TFHE
scheme to perform the CKKS bootstrapping operation. In the case
of a conventional CKKS bootstrapping algorithm, it is necessary to
work with large parameter sets, typically ranging from N =215 to
N = 217. This ensures that there are a sufficient number of limbs
(typically 17 to 19 limbs) available to perform bootstrapping itself
as well as perform application operations. If one were to use small
parameters such as N =213, there would not be a sufficient number
of limbs to complete the bootstrapping process itself. Consequently,
supporting any real-world practical applications is infeasible with
smaller N and logQ parameters. Our scheme-switching approach
for CKKS bootstrapping utilizes only a single limb during the bootstrapping process. Therefore, with our approach, real-world practical
applications are feasible using small parameters such as N =213.
Our scheme-switching approach to perform the CKKS bootstrapping also enables parallelization of the bootstrapping operation. Par-

allelism during bootstrapping is introduced by the fact that a single
RLWE ciphertext can be represented using multiple LWE ciphertexts in the TFHE scheme. The bootstrapping function is embedded
within the BlindRotate operation in TFHE, which operates on
distinct LWE ciphertexts in parallel, and can be spread across multiple compute platforms. This parallel execution is feasible because
there is no data dependency between the distinct LWE ciphertexts.
The resultant ciphertexts from these BlindRotate operations are
accumulated into a single RLWE ciphertext by streaming results
from several compute platforms to a single compute platform.
To facilitate this hybrid strategy, in addition to all the primitive
CKKS operations, we implement Extract (short for sample extraction), ModulusSwitch, and BlindRotate TFHE operations.
We propose several novel microarchitecture-level optimizations
at a fine-grain modular arithmetic level to NTT datapath and
BlindRotate datapath, which reduce the on-chip memory
requirements and the number of memory transfers. Moreover,
through our optimized ExternalProduct operation scheduling,
we extract as much parallelism as possible in the BlindRotate
operation. In addition to the benefits of parallelizing bootstrapping,
our hybrid scheme-switching offers benefits in terms of support
for smaller parameter sets while enabling bootstrapping operation.
Furthermore, as our bootstrapping utilizes only a single level,
the selected parameter set allows for less frequent bootstrapping,
resulting in further performance enhancements. Moreover, we
require smaller-sized bootstrapping keys leading to about 18× less
amount of data to be read from the main memory for the keys.
In particular, we make the following contributions:
We propose HEAP, a multi-compute platform scalable
bootstrapping accelerator that parallelizes CKKS bootstrapping
operation by using a hybrid scheme-switching approach. To
the best of our knowledge, HEAP is the first accelerator to
implement a hybrid scheme-switching approach.
• In HEAP we use low-latency tightly coupled functional
units with fine-grained pipelining. We optimize the NTT
and BlindRotate datapath to enable parallel scheduling
of operations while reducing the data accesses from the
main memory. The configuration of our on-chip memory
complements the implementation of functional units and the
optimization of the datapath.

•

The approach in HEAP is agnostic of the hardware and can be
mapped to a multi-CPU, multi-GPU, multi-FPGA, or multi-ASIC
system. However, following the FAB work which suggests that
FPGA provides a sweet spot for FHE acceleration, we map HEAP
onto a single-FPGA and an eight-FPGA system. On average
HEAP performs bootstrapping 3283×, 12.7×, 4×, and 15.39×
faster than existing state-of-the-art CPU, GPU, ASIC, and FPGA
implementations. We evaluate two applications including logistic
regression (LR) model training and ResNet-20 inference utilizing
this hybrid methodology for bootstrapping. HEAP performs on
average 5293×, 59.35×, 37.8×, and 13.14× faster LR model
training than existing state-of-the-art CPU, GPU, ASIC, and
FPGA implementations. Similarly, HEAP performs on average
39708×, 3.7×, and 1.2× faster ResNet-20 inference than existing
state-of-the-art CPU, GPU, and ASIC implementations.

Symbols
→
−
→
−
a, b
→
−
→
−
⟨a,b⟩
N
n
nt
Q
q
p
∆
R
RQ
L
a

TABLE I
NOTATIONS USED IN THIS PAPER.
Description
Denotes two vectors a and b.
Denotes the inner product of vectors a and b.
Denotes the ring dimension and a value of power of two.
Denotes the number of plaintext elements in a ciphertext.
Maximum possible value is N/2.
Denotes LWE mask and the value ranges from 256-4096.
Denotes the full modulus of ciphertext
Denotes a limb of Q, and is typically a machine
word-sized prime number.
Denotes additional limb in raised basis, and is typically a
machine word-sized prime number.
Denotes scale factor of CKKS plaintext, and takes a
value close to the limb of a ciphertext.
Denotes a 2Nth cyclotomic ring, R=Z[X]/(X N +1).
Denotes a quotient ring, RQ =R/QR.
Denotes maximum number of limbs in a ciphertext.
Denotes a ring element, a=a(X)
a=a0 +a1 .X +···+aN−1 .X N−1 ∈R.

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we present a brief mathematical background on
the two FHE schemes: CKKS and TFHE, along with the approach
to switch between the two schemes. The security of both the FHE
schemes is based on a hard lattice problem called Learning With
Errors (LWE), and its variant, such as Ring LWE (RLWE) [42].
Note that in this work, we do not use sparse secret keys as there are
security concerns with using sparse keys [14], [52]. The notations
used throughout the paper are listed in Table I.
A. The CKKS Scheme
The CKKS scheme is an approximate homomorphic encryption
scheme where plaintext is a vector of length n with each entry
chosen from a field of complex numbers C. Before a message
is encoded into a plaintext vector, it is scaled by a scale factor
∆ to preserve as many precision bits as possible. The encryption
of a plaintext m results in a ciphertext ct = (a, b), which is an
RLWE ciphertext consisting of a pair of polynomials in RQ. The
coefficients of these polynomials are elements of ZQ. Hereafter,
throughout the paper, we denote the CKKS ciphertext by the
notation ctR indicating an RLWE ciphertext.
The precision of Q can range from hundreds to thousands of
bits depending upon the use case. Unfortunately, it is impractical
to perform operations on such large coefficients using today’s
computing systems that typically have word sizes of 64-bit or lower.
Therefore, the polynomials are decomposed into an equivalent
representation using a residue number system (RNS). The smaller
polynomials have machine word-sized coefficients modulo each
of the qi and each of these polynomials is known as aQ
limb of
L−1
ciphertext with respect to smaller modulus q such that Q= i=0 qi.
This allows us to perform addition and multiplication over ZQ
using standard machine words.
All addition and multiplication operations on these polynomials
involve scalar modular additions and scalar modular multiplications.
Current commercially available computing platforms do not
inherently support these modular operations. Furthermore,
computing modular reduction requires performing an expensive
division operation. Hence, optimizing modular arithmetic operations

