2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Alternate Path Fetch
Aniket Deshmukh

Lingzhe(Chester) Cai

Yale N. Patt

University of Texas at Austin
United States
a.deshmuhk@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
United States
chestercai@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
United States
patt@ece.utexas.edu

frontend is better utilized for fetching the alternate path
of H2P branches.
Building a wider Fetch stage requires reading more bytes
from the I-Cache every cycle which can be easily done by
banking the I-Cache such that consecutive cache lines are
stored in different banks. The Decode width can be increased
by adding more parallel decoders1 . These changes require
additional logic but are unlikely to impact the critical path
and increase pipeline latency.
The Branch Predictor (BP) and Branch Target Buffer (BTB)
limit frontend bandwidth as current branch prediction algorithms are sequential. To predict a branch, the Program
Counter (PC) and branch history are used to access the BP
and BTB tables, which in turn update these registers. Accesses
for a subsequent prediction cannot begin until the previous
prediction finishes, which takes at least one cycle. Most current
predictor designs can predict up to one taken branch per cycle.
In many applications, this severely limits the effect of a wider
pipeline due to the density of taken branches. While there has
been some prior work on predicting multiple taken branches
per cycle [30], [38], [45], these are either expensive and hard
to implement on current predictors or only work in specific
scenarios.

Abstract—Modern out-of-order cores rely on a large instruction supply from the processor frontend to achieve high
performance. This requires building wider pipelines with more
accurate branch predictors. However, scaling the pipeline width
is becoming more challenging due to limitations on the number
of instructions that can be renamed and branches that can
be predicted in a single cycle. Moreover, mispredictions reduce
the useful fetch bandwidth that can be extracted from a wider
frontend.
Our work, Alternate Path Fetch (APF), effectively uses a wide
frontend by dividing the pipeline into two parallel sections. One
processes regular instructions, and the other uses a separate
pipeline to Branch Predict, Fetch, Decode, and partially Rename
instructions on the alternate path of hard-to-predict (H2P)
branches. The pipelines operate simultaneously using a ParallelFetch scheme we developed. This allows APF to more efficiently
utilize the bandwidth of a wider frontend without the overhead
associated with building a monolithic, wider pipeline.
APF improves performance by reducing the pipeline re-fill
delay on branch mispredictions. Unlike other solutions that fully
rename and execute instructions on both sides of a branch, we
show that stopping after partial Renaming on the alternate path
provides better performance through improved coverage and
avoids the complexity associated with further processing. APF
provides a 5% geomean speedup over an aggressive 8-wide outof-order core.
Index Terms—Branch Prediction, Predication

I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern out-of-order (OoO) cores achieve high levels of
single-thread performance by speculating on large instruction
windows and building deeper pipelines. The execution backend of these cores needs to be driven by a large instruction
supply. This requires wider pipelines supported by accurate
branch prediction. OoO pipelines have grown wider over the
years: many modern designs have an 8-wide frontend [2],
[3], [5]. However, further scaling is challenging. To build
a wider pipeline, the width of all frontend stages (Branch
Prediction, Fetch, Decode, and Rename) needs to be increased.
The Fetch and Decode logic is mostly parallel and relatively
easier to scale. Increasing Branch Prediction and Rename
bandwidth, however, poses major limitations [29]. Moreover,
branch mispredictions are still a problem, even with modern
Branch Predictors such as TAGE-SC-L [37] and Hashed
Perceptron [21], as frequent branch mispredictions from a
few hard-to-predict (H2P) branches [46] reduce the number
of useful instructions fetched by a wider frontend. We posit
that the additional fetch bandwidth obtained from a wider

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00091

Fig. 1. Performance of a 16-wide OoO core with one extra cycle on Rename
relative to an 8-wide baseline

In the Rename stage, each instruction within a fetch packet
(instructions fetched in the same cycle) needs to check whether
it depends on any older instructions within that fetch packet
before accessing the Register Alias Table (RAT). Increasing
1 In x86 machines, length decoding is sequential; going wider requires more
logic than just duplicating existing decoders and increases the pipeline latency.
However, using pre-decode bits or a uop cache allow x86 machines to provide
higher decode bandwidth without additional latency.

1217

the Rename width directly impacts the critical path of the RAT
read and dependency checking logic [29] and thus increases
the number of pipeline stages in Rename [35]. Additional
frontend latency reduces performance as it takes longer to refill a deeper pipeline after a branch misprediction. Even adding
one additional cycle of Rename latency hurts performance for
applications sensitive to branch mispredictions. Fig.1 shows
the performance of a 16-wide OoO core2 relative to an 8wide baseline on SPEC2017 Integer and GAP benchmarks.
Workloads with a high taken branch density show very little benefit. Benchmarks with high branch misses-per-kiloinstructions (MPKI) (Fig.2) drop in performance due to the
increased misprediction latency.

Fig. 2. Conditional Branch Mispredictions (8-wide core)

Our work, Alternate Path Fetch, aims to fetch and process
instructions on both paths: the predicted path as specified
by the branch predictor, and the alternate path which inverts
its prediction, after H2P conditional branches. When an H2P
branch resolves, if the prediction is incorrect, the previously
fetched alternate path instructions can be preemptively inserted
into the pipeline. This reduces the pipeline re-fill delay: the
time it takes for correct path instructions to enter the backend
after a branch misprediction is resolved, and in turn improves
performance.
Alternate Path Fetch (APF) processes instructions on a
separate pipeline until RAT access and is supported by a
low-overhead parallel-fetch mechanism for the two paths.
This breaks the 16-wide frontend into two separate pipelines
and avoids the Renaming and predictor limitations associated
with a normal 16-wide core. It does not add any additional
Allocation width, functional units, or Retire width, but still
provides significantly better performance. Our contributions
are summarized as follows:
• We propose Alternate Path Fetch (APF), a technique
that effectively utilizes the fetch bandwidth of a wider
frontend.
• To support multiple taken predictions every cycle, we
introduce a scheme that breaks the TAGE-SC-L predictor
into several smaller predictors. Together with banking the
I-Cache and BTB, this enables APF to predict branches
and fetch instructions for both paths in parallel without
adding additional ports to these structures.
2 The Allocation width, number of functional units, and Retire width are
also scaled for the 16-wide OoO core to match the frontend.

We analyze the trade-offs associated with the depth of the
alternate path pipeline and show that processing alternate
path instructions up until RAT access across multiple H2P
branches both provides better performance and reduces
hardware overhead and design complexity.
• When selecting an H2P branch for APF, we show that
an oldest-first scheme with priority given to low TAGE
confidence branches works well as it reduces wasted APF
cycles and provides good misprediction coverage.
•

II. P RIOR W ORK
The idea of fetching and executing instructions on both
paths of a branch was first introduced by Eager Execution.
Doing this for all branches has an exponential overhead,
so later research looked at several variants to restrict the
exponential branching [42] and limited Eager Execution to
low confidence branches [26], [43], [44]. However, these
approaches require a significant amount of hardware support
to execute multiple alternate paths in parallel.
Predication techniques also fetch and execute both paths
after a branch but only if the control flows after that branch
converge within a few instructions. Compiler-only predication
techniques [10], [16] take advantage of if-else statements
with short bodies, commonly referred to as hammocks. They
execute instructions on both paths and selectively commit the
results on one path once the branch predicate is known. Wish
Branches [23] dynamically pick between executing predicated
code and performing branch prediction based on whether the
prediction is accurate. Dynamic Predication techniques [17],
[22], [25] find branches that can be predicated at runtime and
do not require compiler support.
Predication-based techniques have a low misprediction coverage as they only target certain types of branches. The stateof-the-art, Auto-Predication of Critical Branches (ACB), relies
on detecting specific code layouts to find the merge point
for an H2P branch. ACB increases backend pressure as instructions from both paths compete for execution resources. In
contrast, APF works for any mispredicted conditional branch
and can target branches that are not amenable to predication.
It does not have the complexity associated with renaming both
paths and selectively discarding wrong path instructions. APF
only executes predicted path instructions and does not increase
backend pressure
The concept of not executing alternate path instructions was
first introduced by Dual Path Instruction Processing (DPIP)
[11]. DPIP performs Renaming and Allocation for alternate
path instructions which has large hardware costs and limits
which branches it can target. Moreover, it shares frontend
cycles with the predicted path which is detrimental to performance with modern high-accuracy branch predictors as it
takes useful fetch cycles away from the predicted path (which
is often correct). In fact, most prior work on processing two
paths reduce the effective fetch bandwidth available to the
program as they cannot fetch alternate path instructions in
parallel with the predicted path, which APF can do. Overall,
APF does better both in terms of performance and hardware

1218

