Scalable, Programmable and Dense:
The HammerBlade Open-Source RISC-V Manycore
Dai Cheol Jung1 , Max Ruttenberg1 , Paul Gao1 , Scott Davidson1 , Daniel Petrisko1 , Kangli Li1 ,
Aditya K Kamath1 , Lin Cheng2 , Shaolin Xie1 , Peitian Pan2 , Zhongyuan Zhao2 , Zichao Yue2 ,
Bandhav Veluri1 , Sripathi Muralitharan1 , Adrian Sampson2 , Andrew Lumsdaine1,3 , Zhiru Zhang2 ,
Christopher Batten2 , Mark Oskin1 , Dustin Richmond4 , Michael Bedford Taylor1
1

University of Washington, 2 Cornell University, 3 PNNL, 4 University of California, Santa Cruz

Abstract—Existing tiled manycore architectures propose to
convert abundant silicon resources into general-purpose parallel processors with unmatched computational density and
programmability. However, as we approach 100K cores in one
chip, conventional manycore architectures struggle to navigate
three key axes: scalability, programmability, and density. Many
manycores sacrifice programmability for density; or scalability
for programmability. In this paper, we explore HammerBlade,
which simultaneously achieves scalability, programmability and
density. HammerBlade is a fully open-source RISC-V manycore
architecture, which has been silicon-validated with a 2048-core
ASIC implementation using a 14/16nm process. We evaluate the
system using a suite of parallel benchmarks that captures a broad
spectrum of computation and communication patterns.
Index Terms—manycore architecture, parallel programming,
open-source hardware, RISC-V

Memory

Memory

Level 1
Router
L1

tiles

Level 1
Router
L1

Level 2
Router

caches
Memory

Memory

(a) Flat

Level 1
Router
L1

Level 1
Router
L1

Level 2
Router

L2

L2

Memory

Memory

(b) Hierarchical

Fig. 1: Resource organization in conventional manycore
architectures. High-diameter network topology in flat manycore is prone to massive network congestion. Hierarchical
manycore provides fast communication between cores within a
cluster, but the communication between clusters is complicated
by the multi-level cache and hierarchical network topology.

I. M OTIVATION
Tiled manycore architectures propose to convert abundant
silicon resources into parallel processors with unmatched
computational density and programmability. Building such a
processor involves stamping out identically shaped tiled processors interconnected by a Network-on-Chip (NoC). Due to
their simplicity, tiled multicores can be designed, implemented
and verified by a small engineering team, lowering the time
and cost to deploy a new system [5], [43]. Manycore architecture resonates with a growing demand for flexible, rather than
specialized, parallel hardware to accelerate innovative ideas in
next-gen AI and ML [18], [25], [29], [32], [39], and in other
emerging domains.
Modern manycore chips already pack hundreds, and occasionally more than a thousand cores into a single die [21],
[27], [55]. Even with modest projected technology scaling
over the next few years, 100K+ cores will fit on a full-reticle
chip. However, general-purpose parallel manycore chips were
conceived when 100 cores seemed far off, and scalability by
another 1,000X is not assured. Current manycore architectures
contain built-in scalability, programmability, and density limiters that must be re-examined and refined to make the next
leap. This paper illuminates a path to 100K cores.
We outline key limitations of existing manycore designs:
Density. Many mechanisms in multicore designs are inherited
directly from multi-chip processors, that were constructed
by gluing together expensive single-core optimized chips.

These single-core chips focused on peak-performance, and
multiprocessor support was a value-added feature that brought
a high price and justified die area increases even if relatively
large. Now that a chip holds many cores, total raw compute
is inversely proportional to the area (or power) used by the
compute tile, since it determines how many cores fit on-die.
Stripping down the cores so more of them fit has become the
prime directive. Large private L2 caches are the easiest to let
go, since the geomean performance impact of halving cache
size is often a small percentage, and the resulting core count
increase high. Beyond “right-sizing” the memory system,
there are two other classes of optimizations: first, replacing
expensive sequential processor mechanisms with cheaper ones,
or throwing them out altogether; and second, revisiting parallel
programming mechanisms we have for concepts like memorylevel parallelism, synchronization, and communication, and
replacing with more parsimonious yet equally effective ones.
In this paper, we show how all three can be optimized.
Scalability. There are many kinds of scalability; and tiled
manycores usually exhibit physical scalability; i.e. the ability
to scale without frequency being disproportionately affected by
growing logic depths or wire lengths. But logical scalability
describes the degree to which resource consumption and

1

We present HammerBlade, a new kind of manycore
architecture that explicitly optimizes the three key criteria
for realizing 100K-core manycore processors: scalability,
programmability, and density.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of this architecture by
drawing on data from our open-source, silicon implementation, which implements 2048 RISC-V cores in a
manycore processor using a fraction of the reticle in a
14/16 nm process, and breaks world records for RISC-V
performance. The hardware is up and running in our lab.
• We rigorously evaluate the system using a suite of parallel
benchmarks that captures a broad spectrum of computation and communication patterns to demonstrate its
parallel programmability. Our RTL simulation integrates
DRAMSim3 [36] to accurately model a modern Highbandwidth Memory (HBM) 2.0 [26]. We analyze the
hardware resource utilization and discuss the bottlenecks
observed in each kernel (Figure 11).
• Using the post-APR gate-level power analysis, we
demonstrate that our area-optimized RISC-V cores are
3.6–15.1⇥ more energy-efficient than a prior leading
manycore chip on a per-instruction, process-normalized
basis (Figure 13).

latencies of basic operations are controlled as core count
grows. The first flat manycores, shown in Figure 1a, generally
posited a large uniform tile array interconnected by 2-D
mesh; with memory or I/O interfaces on the edge of the
chip. For nearest-neighbor communication, this scales quite
effectively, but for random/non-local communication, or allto-edge communication as typical in DRAM accesses, the
network quickly fills up, because each message must occupy
O(sqrt(N )) cycle-hops of resources and time. In an N ⇥ N
mesh, each tile can only inject packets at the average rate of
2/N per cycle before edge network channels become completely saturated [50]. And interestingly, mesh networks tend
to underutilize available wiring bandwidth unless they assume
very wide packets and thus block level memory accesses.
Hierarchical manycores, shown in Figure 1b, a more recent
phenomenon, seek to address this logical scalability problem
by comprising clusters of cores in a rigid network hierarchy.
Cores in the clusters are often connected with low-latency
crossbars, designed to share some common resources. These
clusters are then connected by the network in another level of
hierarchy, usually with wider channel width. This works well
for transferring cache-line sized data, but is inefficient for finegrained, random access, which is common in graph and sparse
data. Sharing data between clusters requires coordination of
L1 and L2 caches, which adds cache-coherency complexities
and overheads. Paradoxically, clustering reduces cross-network
bandwidth, and to address this bandwidth shortage, will require larger ops per byte computational intensity at the node
level; resulting in larger local memory, larger tile sizes, and
reduced density.
Parallel Programmability. Parallel architecture choices that
attempt to optimize density and scalability often come at a
cost to parallel programmability. GPUs, for example, scale to
reticle sizes using Streaming Multiprocessors (SM), but those
SMs have extremely restricted communication between each
other. GPUs seek to attain density through SIMT-abstracted
SIMD units, which are infamous for their performance problems when memory accesses or control flow diverges. Message
passing architectures are plagued by area-overheads of receive
queues, challenges with deadlock and difficulty in expressing
computations efficiently that pull rather than push data.
These programmability constraints, caused by density/scalability compromises in the architecture, add many people-years
of effort to program, and even may lead the programmer to
select suboptimal algorithms that happen to work within the
constraints. This research shows that with the right combination of architectural techniques, all three can be attained –
scalability, programmability, and density. The result is an ultraoptimized, more ideal general-purpose parallel architecture
enabling programming models that can express a broad range
of parallel algorithms in the most performant ways, for both
regular and irregular data access and control flow [35].

•

This paper makes the following key insights:
Relative to prior manycore designs, aggressive densification – i.e. focusing on more area-efficient realizations
of single-threaded execution, parallel coordination mechanisms, and memory resources – stands out as a key
contributor of performance uplift (Figure 10, 16).
• HammerBlade’s Cellular Manycore approach provides an
effective alternative to flat and hierarchical manycores,
diffusing cache banks into a large manycore array. It
provides (1) constant bandwidth and latency even as
the system scales, (2) explicit optimization of data and
computation placement, (3) chip-wide PGAS-style programming in a global memory system, and (4) coherence
without need for coherence hardware.
• Ruche Networks [30] allow for increased logical scaling,
enabling larger collections of cores to co-communicate
with larger collections of cache banks without being
impacted by bandwidth or latency (Figure 15), handily
beating 2-D meshes (Figure 14).
• Networks oriented around single-word data messages can
be implemented efficiently and are more effective at
transferring high quantities of sparse data across clusters
of cores than block-level messages that are endemic to
hierarchical or mesh manycores (Figure 3, 16).
•

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section III
describes the HammerBlade (HB) architecture. Section IV
describes the programming model and the parallel kernels
used for evaluation. Section V evaluates the key architectural
optimizations, and explores different scaling strategies. Section
VI surveys the related work.

II. C ONTRIBUTIONS & I NSIGHTS
This paper has the following contributions:

2

