Pre-gated MoE: An Algorithm-System Co-Design for
Fast and Scalable Mixture-of-Expert Inference
Ranggi Hwang∗†

Jianyu Wei∗†

Shijie Cao

KAIST
ranggi.hwang@kaist.ac.kr

USTC / Microsoft Research
noob@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Microsoft Research
shijiecao@microsoft.com

Changho Hwang

Xiaohu Tang†

Ting Cao

Mao Yang

Microsoft Research
changhohwang@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
v-xiaohutang@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
ting.cao@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
maoyang@microsoft.com

Abstract—Large language models (LLMs) based on transformers have made significant strides in recent years, the success of
which is driven by scaling up their model size. Despite their
high algorithmic performance, the computational and memory
requirements of LLMs present unprecedented challenges. To
tackle the high compute requirements of LLMs, the Mixture-ofExperts (MoE) architecture was introduced which is able to scale
its model size without proportionally scaling up its computational
requirements. Unfortunately, MoE’s high memory demands and
dynamic activation of sparse experts restrict its applicability
to real-world problems. Previous solutions that offload MoE’s
memory-hungry expert parameters to CPU memory fall short because the latency to migrate activated experts from CPU to GPU
incurs high performance overhead. Our proposed Pre-gated MoE
system effectively tackles the compute and memory challenges of
conventional MoE architectures using our algorithm-system codesign. Pre-gated MoE employs our novel pre-gating function
which alleviates the dynamic nature of sparse expert activation,
allowing our proposed system to address the large memory
footprint of MoEs while also achieving high performance. We
demonstrate that Pre-gated MoE is able to improve performance,
reduce GPU memory consumption, while also maintaining the
same level of model quality. These features allow our Pre-gated
MoE system to cost-effectively deploy large-scale LLMs using
just a single GPU with high performance.
Index Terms—Mixture-of-expert, inference system, machine
learning, large language model, memory offloading

I. I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) applications based on large language models (LLMs) have taken the world by storm, widely
being deployed in various consumer facing products [24], [26],
[33]. The success of LLMs has been driven by scaling up the
model capacity (i.e., the model size) and its training dataset,
the largest trained model size increasing by around 1,000×
within the past 5 years, from a few hundred million parameters
to approaching a trillion parameter scale [3], [5], [39]. With
larger model size bringing higher model accuracy, it is likely
that future models will also increase in their model capacity.
∗ Co-first authors who contributed equally to this research.
† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research.

However, a critical challenge in sustainably growing model
size is its increasingly demanding computation requirement.
To tackle the high compute requirements of LLMs, the
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [37] model was suggested as an
alternative to the previous dense LLMs [3], [5], [29], [39]. The
power of MoE comes from its ability to scale up the model
capacity by increasing the number of expert parameters within
an MoE block. Despite the increase in model parameter size,
however, MoE utilizes a gate function to only partially activate
the experts in a sparse manner, allowing them to achieve sublinear compute cost with respect to model capacity. In contrast,
prior dense LLMs activate the entire model parameters for
inference and cause its compute cost to scale quadratically
to model size, incurring significant computation overhead.
Despite its merits, a critical challenge of MoE is its large
memory requirement and the dynamically activated sparse
experts which cause high deployment cost, rendering MoE’s
applicability in real-world problems to be limited.
1) Large memory requirement of experts. While sparsely
activating model parameters (i.e., the experts) helps
reduce compute cost to achieve the same model quality
as their dense LLM counterparts, MoEs require significantly larger memory to accommodate the large number
of experts. For instance, an MoE-based Google SwitchTransformer [8] can have up to 75× more parameters
than the FLOPs-equivalent dense T5 model [29]. In other
words, MoEs have a much lower memory-efficiency vs.
dense LLMs, bringing critical system-level challenges in
deploying MoE-based LLMs. To accommodate MoE’s
large model size under GPU’s limited memory size,
multiple GPUs can be utilized for deploying MoE where
expert parallelism is employed to distribute the expert
parameters across the GPUs to store only a portion of
the experts for inference [18], [19], [30].
2) Dynamic and sparse activation of experts. Although
multi-GPU solutions can distribute expert parameters
across the GPU memory, MoE only partially activates
a subset of the experts in a sparse manner [37]. This
makes the number of experts actually utilized per each

GPU to become either very small or non-existent (i.e.,
none of the experts in a GPU are activated, leaving GPU
idle) [21]. Furthermore, the sparse expert activation is
dynamically decided at runtime, making it difficult to
anticipate how many experts will be activated in each
GPU. As such, the effective computation conducted over
each GPU becomes low, exhibiting low GPU compute
utilization and aggravating the total cost of ownership
(TCO) for deployment.
Prior work on deploying MoE seeks to address these
dual challenges by offloading MoE’s memory hungry expert
parameters into CPU memory or SSD [1], [14], [18], [38]
(referred to as MoE-offload below). The benefit of MoEoffload is that it reduces the number of GPUs required for
deploying MoE, which helps increase the GPU’s compute
efficiency for inference. Offloading MoE parameters, however,
is no silver bullet as it comes with a significant increase in
inference latency, deteriorating quality of service (QoS) to
end users. This is because CPU offloading can only resolve
MoE’s large memory requirement without addressing the data
dependency issue that arises with dynamic sparse activation,
a unique characteristic of the MoE. In an MoE block, there
exists a sequential dependency between (1) the “selection” of
which experts should be activated (using MoE’s gate function),
and (2) the “execution” of activated experts for inference.
Because such data dependency is dynamically resolved by the
input data, the two-stage process of (1) expert selection and
(2) expert execution must be serialized back-to-back. Consequently, the latency to migrate the activated expert parameters
from CPU to GPU cannot be hidden under MoE-offload and
causes severe performance overheads, failing to address the
aforementioned challenges of deploying MoE (Section III-B).
In this work, we propose Pre-gated MoE, an algorithmsystem co-design that enables MoE inference to incur low
GPU memory consumption while still achieving high performance, substantially reducing TCO. We briefly summarize the
key contribution and novelty of our Pre-gated MoE below.
(Algorithm) In conventional MoE architectures, the gate
function in the N-th MoE block selects the experts to
activate which will then be executed within the same Nth MoE block. In our proposed design, we modify the
role of a gate function to preemptively select the experts
to be activated for the next MoE block (hence its new
name, the pre-gate function). More concretely, the pregate function in the N-th MoE block selects the experts to
activate for the (N+1)-th MoE block. The novelty of our
pre-gate function lies in its ability to completely eliminate
the sequential dependency between the expert selection
and expert execution stage within any given MoE block
(i.e., data dependency now exists across the N-th MoE
block’s expert selection and the (N+1)-th block’s expert
execution), which our proposed system effectively utilizes
for performance optimization as detailed below.
• (System) Similar to prior MoE-offload systems, our Pregated MoE stores the memory capacity limited expert

•

parameters in CPU memory and reduces the number of
GPUs required for inference. Unlike MoE-offload, our
Pre-gated MoE utilizes the pre-gate function to overlap
the CPU→GPU expert migration latency with the expert
execution stage, minimizing the expert migration’s impact
on performance. Specifically, Pre-gated MoE utilizes the
N-th pre-gate function to identify the set of experts
to activate for the (N+1)-th MoE block, in advance,
effectively prefetching only the activated experts to the
GPU in preparation for the (N+1)-th block’s execution
while concurrently going through the expert execution for
the N-th MoE block.
We evaluate our Pre-gated MoE system using state-ofthe-art MoE models, achieving comparable or even higher
model accuracy compared to the original MoE model across a
wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks (e.g.,
summarization, and question answering). At the same time,
decoupling the expert selection vs. expert execution stage
provides our Pre-gated MoE to significantly reduce end-to-end
inference latency, only adding 23% performance overhead than
the oracular, performance-optimal GPU-only solution that can
store the entire MoE parameters in GPU memory. Pre-gated
MoE also reduces peak GPU memory consumption by 4.2×
vs. GPU-only, allowing the deployment of larger LLMs within
a single GPU. Overall, our Pre-gated MoE system presents
a fast, scalable, and cost-effective solution for serving MoEbased LLMs.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Dense LLMs using Transformers
Transformer model architecture. Transformer models [42]
have become the dominant approach in designing ML applications for natural language processing (NLP), due to
their ability to capture long-range dependencies and complex
patterns in data [6], [39]. There are two primary ways in
which a transformer model is structured: an encoder-decoder
architecture [29] and a decoder-only architecture [3]. An
encoder-decoder architecture consists of an encoder module
that processes the input data (sequence of input tokens) and a
decoder module that generates the output (an output token
per decoder). The decoder-only architecture on the other
hand implicitly incorporates the encoding process within the
transformer blocks, eliminating the need for a separate encoder
module. Regardless of which architecture is employed, both
encoder-decoder and decoder-only architectures employ the
following key components of transformers: the self-attention
layer, the position-wise feed-forward networks (FFN) layer,
normalizations, and residual connections, as shown in Figure 1(a). Self-attention helps determine the inter-word relationships and their dependencies within a sequence, whereas
the FFN layer applies non-linear transformations to capture
complex patterns in the input data. Both self-attention and
FFN account for a significant portion of computation as well
as memory requirements of transformer models.
Challenges in scaling dense LLMs. The success of transformer based dense LLMs has primarily been driven by scaling

