Mirage: An RNS-Based Photonic Accelerator for
DNN Training
Cansu Demirkiran*

Guowei Yang

Darius Bunandar

Ajay Joshi

Boston University
Boston, MA, USA
cansu@bu.edu

Boston University
Boston, MA, USA
guoweiy@bu.edu

Lightmatter
Boston, MA, USA
darius@lightmatter.co

Boston University
Boston, MA, USA
joshi@bu.edu

DACs convert these values into bi-bit and bw -bit signed integers.
A dot product between two h-long vectors with bw -bit and bi-bit
elements then produces a result with bout=bi+bw +log2(h)−1 bits
of information. To capture this output fully, an ADC with bit precision bADC ≥bout is needed. Unfortunately, the energy consumption
of ADCs increases exponentially with bit precision and can easily
make the high energy efficiency promise of photonic computing for
DNNs no longer feasible. To avoid this, the common practice is to
use ADCs with bADC<bout and lose bout−bADC bits of information
on every dot product result [49]. In addition, vector size h, which
is determined by the size of the photonic core, is typically smaller
than the matrix sizes in large DNN layers. This requires the matrices
to be tiled into multiple smaller blocks and the GEMM operation
to be executed tile-by-tile. Each tiled-MVM operation produces a
partial output to the final GEMM output where the aforementioned
information loss is induced on every partial output—causing the
errors to accumulate while composing the final GEMM output.
While some simple DNNs are more resilient to noise, typically,
I. INTRODUCTION
as the DNN gets larger and the task becomes more complex, a
Photonic computing has shown remarkable promise in degradation in accuracy is observed [17], [49]. This degradation can
accelerating Deep Neural Network (DNN) inference by enabling be quite drastic even for DNN inference, especially for higher h. Furhigh throughput and energy-efficient matrix/vector operations [16], thermore, DNN training is often more sensitive to quantization noise
[35], [36], [45], [52]–[54], [60], [67]. However, photonic than inference, as gradient calculation requires a relatively higher
computing—similar to other analog computing methods—suffers dynamic range. Therefore, the scope of DNN acceleration with
photonic hardware has been limited to DNN inference except for
from precision issues, making it unsuitable for DNN training.
Photonic DNN accelerators are typically centered around a few works [6], [22], [29], [44], [68] that focused on training very
a matrix-vector multiplication (MVM) unit based on Mach small DNN models and simple tasks. Generally speaking, training
Zehnder Interferometers (MZIs) [16], [52], Micro-Ring Resonators state-of-the-art DNN models using photonic compute cores has been
(MRRs) [35], [36], [45], [60], or a combination of the two [53], [54]. a far-fetched goal due to the limited precision of analog operations.
In this paper, we present Mirage, a precise photonic accelerator
These units perform a set of dot products in parallel in the analog
domain for executing general matrix-matrix multiplication (GEMM) for DNN training. Mirage leverages the Residue Number System
operations. Operations in the MVM unit require switching between (RNS), a numeral system based on modular arithmetic, to perform
digital and analog domains before and after each analog operation. high-precision analog operations in the photonic hardware. In RNS,
These conversions are performed by using digital-to-analog and numbers are represented as a set of integer residues for a set of
analog-to-digital converters (DACs and ADCs). In the analog selected co-prime moduli—reducing the bit-width of the operands.
domain, the values can only be represented as fixed-point (FXP) Essentially, RNS simplifies high-precision operations into multiple
numbers whose precision is limited by the precision of DACs and low-precision operations and enables high-precision arithmetic
despite using low-precision data converters. As a result, we can take
ADCs, as the values are encoded in physical properties.
To better understand this limitation, assume an input vector and a advantage of the high-speed and energy-efficiency opportunities
weight vector—that are to be multiplied in the analog domain—pass of photonic computing while achieving high DNN accuracy.
GEMM operations in the RNS space require modular dot
through DACs with bi-bit and bw -bit precision, respectively. The
products. Mirage employs a novel micro-architecture for performing
* Corresponding author
modular multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations in the photonic
Abstract—Photonic computing is a compelling avenue for performing highly efficient matrix multiplication, a crucial operation in Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs). While this method has shown great success
in DNN inference, meeting the high precision demands of DNN training
proves challenging due to the precision limitations imposed by costly
data converters and the analog noise inherent in photonic hardware.
This paper proposes Mirage, a photonic DNN training accelerator that
overcomes the precision challenges in photonic hardware using the
Residue Number System (RNS). RNS is a numeral system based on
modular arithmetic—allowing us to perform high-precision operations
via multiple low-precision modular operations. In this work, we present
a novel micro-architecture and dataflow for an RNS-based photonic
tensor core performing modular arithmetic in the analog domain.
By combining RNS and photonics, Mirage provides high energy
efficiency without compromising precision and can successfully train
state-of-the-art DNNs achieving accuracy comparable to FP32 training.
Our study shows that on average across several DNNs when compared
to systolic arrays, Mirage achieves more than 23.8× faster training
and 32.1× lower EDP in an iso-energy scenario and consumes 42.8×
lower power with comparable or better EDP in an iso-area scenario.

1

∂L
(ℓ)
Using these gradients ∂W
, the DNN parameters are
(ℓ) , i.e., ∆W
updated in each iteration i as:

core by leveraging the fact that the optical phase loops around at
every 2π—which is effectively a modulo 2π operation. We use
phase shifters to perform modular multiplications between two
operands that are encoded in the applied voltage and the length
of the phase shifters. We cascade multiple modular multipliers to
accumulate the multiplication results encoded in the optical phase
to perform modular dot products. A set of modular dot product
units (MDPUs) construct a modular MVM unit (MMVMU). We
deploy a separate MMVMU for each n moduli to perform n
modular MVMs in parallel. We leverage the block floating point
(BFP) format to obtain a high dynamic range while enabling integer
operations in the photonic core using the mantissa bits of BFP
values that share an exponent.
To evaluate our design, we first perform a sensitivity analysis to
choose the optimal BFP configuration and make micro-architecture
decisions that lead to maximum performance in Mirage. We then
compare the training performance of Mirage against systolic arrays
that support FP32 and several other more efficient data formats.
Our contributions in this work are as follows:
• We propose an RNS-based computing model and dataflow for
DNN training that combines BFP and RNS to achieve high
accuracy in analog photonic hardware.
• We introduce a new photonic MAC unit design that efficiently
performs modular operations using the optical phase, which
enables RNS-based arithmetic using photonic hardware.
• Using the photonic MAC units as a building block, we
architect a novel RNS-based photonic DNN training
accelerator, Mirage. To our knowledge, Mirage is the first-ever
photonic training accelerator that can successfully train
real-world practical DNN models.
Our evaluation shows that Mirage can train state-of-the-art DNNs
in various tasks and achieve validation accuracy comparable to FP32
training. We show that on average across several DNNs, Mirage
achieves more than 23.8× faster training and 32.1× lower EnergyDelay Product (EDP) in an iso-energy scenario and consumes 42.8×
lower power with comparable EDP in an iso-area scenario when
compared to systolic arrays using the best-performing data format.

(ℓ)

(ℓ)

(ℓ)

Wi+1 =Wi −η∆Wi ,

(4)

using a step size η for the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
optimization algorithm. Essentially, for each layer, one GEMM
operation is performed during the forward pass and two GEMM
operations are performed during the backward pass.
B. Data Formats for DNNs
The efforts to optimize DNN training or inference mainly revolve
around improving the efficiency of MAC operations and matrix
multiplications. To accelerate MAC operations, scalar quantization
and FXP multiplications have been extensively explored for DNN
inference and training [7], [14], [24], [28], [30], [70]. In addition,
special FP formats have been proposed to improve the hardware
performance over FP32 and FP16 formats. Examples include Brain
Float (BFLOAT16) [63], HFP8 [59], and TensorFloat [58].
In our work, we use the BFP format, which provides a middle
ground between FXP and FP formats. BFP has been used for DNN
inference [8], [15], [57] and training [19], [69] as it is less costly
than the FP formats and achieves better accuracy than the FXP
formats with the same bit-width. BFP format splits tensors into
groups and assigns an exponent to each group that is shared by
the elements within the group. This representation allows integer
operations between groups using only sign and mantissa bits while
preserving the dynamic range through a shared exponent.
In the analog domain, the lack of FP arithmetic and the lack
of support for large-bit-width FXP numbers limit the range of
applications that can benefit from analog computing. Combining
BFP with analog hardware is a promising solution as BFP enables
low-precision integer operations while providing a wider dynamic
range than conventional integer arithmetic. This idea of using BFP
formats for analog computing was first proposed by Basumallik
et al. [8] for DNN inference. In our work, we combine BFP and
RNS to perform DNN training in photonic hardware.
C. Bit Precision in Conventional Analog Cores

Fig. 1(a) shows a diagram for the dataflow in a conventional
analog core performing a single MVM operation. Independent of
DNN training consists of two main steps: forward pass and the technology, in an analog MVM core, inputs and weights in a
backward pass. In a DNN, the input X to the (ℓ+1)-th layer during DNN layer are passed through DACs and are encoded in an analog
a forward pass is the output generated by the previous ((ℓ)-th) layer: property (e.g., phase, amplitude, etc.). After analog dot products
are performed, the output data are passed through ADCs. Here, the

X (ℓ+1) =f (ℓ) W (ℓ)X (ℓ) ,
(1) precision of the analog operation is determined by (1) the precision
of DACs, (2) the precision of ADCs, and (3) the signal-to-noise
where O(ℓ) =W (ℓ)X (ℓ) is a GEMM operation, W (ℓ) is the weight
ratio (SNR) during the analog operations.
(ℓ)
matrix and f (·) is the nonlinear function of the (ℓ)-th layer. After
A dot product between bin-bit input and bw -bit weight—
the forward pass, a loss value L is calculated using the output colboth h-long vectors and encoded by DACs—results in
lected in the forward pass and the ground truth. The gradients of the
bout=bin+bw +log2(h)−1 bits of information. For example, for 8-bit
activations and DNN parameters with respect to L for each layer are
DACs, the output will require more than 16 bits, calling for an ADC
calculated by performing a backward pass after each forward pass:
with bADC≥16 to ensure no information loss. Fig. 1(b) shows the apT ∂L
∂L
proximate energy consumption per conversion for ADCs and DACs
=W (ℓ)
,
(2)
(ℓ)
with different bit precision [40]. As seen in the figure, ADC energy
∂X
∂O(ℓ)
consumption is much higher (two orders of magnitude) than DAC enT
∂L
∂L
=
X (ℓ) .
(3) ergy consumption. In addition, ADC energy consumption increases
(ℓ)
(ℓ)
∂W
∂O
II. BACKGROUND

A. DNN Training

2

