2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

PrIDE: Achieving Secure Rowhammer Mitigation
with Low-Cost In-DRAM Trackers
Aamer Jaleel

Gururaj Saileshwar*

Stephen W. Keckler

Moinuddin Qureshi

NVIDIA
ajaleel@nvidia.com

University of Toronto
gururaj@cs.toronto.edu

NVIDIA
skeckler@nvidia.com

Georgia Tech
moin@gatech.edu

rows and then issue a mitigative action by refreshing the
neighboring victim rows [9]. The tracker typically consists
of a group of counters within each DRAM bank that counts
row activations and performs mitigation transparently within
the time period reserved for regular refresh operations.
The optimal number of tracking entries required to ensure
that all aggressor rows get mitigated is determined by both the
maximum number of activations possible within the refresh
interval and TRH. For example, for DDR5, we can perform
650K activations within the refresh interval of 32ms, so we
can have up-to 200 aggressor rows that can be activated
3.25K times (per bank). Optimal in-DRAM trackers, such as
ProTRR [27] and Mithril [17], have enough entries to track
all the aggressor rows. Any tracker with less than the optimal
number of entries will incur a non-zero failure rate [27].
Unfortunately, given the limited storage capabilities within
the logic space of a DRAM module, in-DRAM trackers are
typically limited to only a few entries. For example, TRR
implementations use 1-30 counters per bank [9], [12]; the recently proposed in-DRAM tracker from Samsung, DSAC [10],
uses 20 entries per bank, and the recently proposed in-DRAM
tracker form SK Hynix, PAT [19], uses 8 tracking entries per
bank. For these trackers, it is hard to a priori determine how
often they will fail when subjected to worst-case patterns.
All TRR designs of DDR4 can be broken within a few
minutes with TRRespass [6] and Blacksmith [12] patterns.
DSAC is vulnerable to Blacksmith (Section VII-F). While the
design details of PAT are not publicly available, the paper [19]
mentions a 30% lower failure rate than conventional designs;
however, if the conventional designs fail within a few minutes,
PAT will still fail within a few minutes. Thus, all known lowcost in-DRAM trackers have been broken by some well-crafted
attack patterns. Looking at how easily in-DRAM trackers
get broken, it may seem futile to develop new low-cost inDRAM trackers, as they would also inevitably be broken by
some well-crafted patterns. In fact, the inability to securely
mitigate Rowhammer with low-cost in-DRAM trackers has
caused the DRAM industry to consider radical changes [3],
[19], including per-row counters, which requires signiﬁcant
area overheads (9% [19]) and write operation after read, which
incurs signiﬁcant performance overheads. The goal of this
paper is to develop a low-cost in-DRAM tracker that is secure,
in that it guarantees time-to-fail in years for all access patterns.
Figure 1 (a) shows an overview of current in-DRAM trackers.

Abstract—Rowhammer-induced bit-ﬂips are a threat to DRAM
security. To mitigate Rowhammer, DDR4 devices employ TRR, an
in-DRAM tracker, to identify aggressor rows. In-DRAM trackers
tend to be severely resource-constrained (1-30 entries), which
means they cannot reliably track all the aggressor rows and are
bound to fail for some access patterns. Unfortunately, for existing
in-DRAM trackers, it is difﬁcult to a priori determine how often
they will fail when subjected to the worst-case pattern. Unsurprisingly, all the current low-cost in-DRAM trackers have been
broken with speciﬁc access patterns within a few minutes. While
provably secure alternatives for in-DRAM tracking exist, they
require thousands of tracking entries, making them unappealing
for commercial adoption. The goal of our paper is to develop a
low-cost in-DRAM tracker that is secure (guarantees a time-tofailure in the range of years) against all access patterns.
We contend that the root cause of the vulnerability of current
low-cost in-DRAM trackers stems from the use of activationcounters to direct policy decisions (e.g. which rows to insert,
which to evict, and which to mitigate). Therefore, an attacker
can perform frequent accesses to dummy rows to evade the
mitigation of an aggressor row. The key insight of our paper
is that to ensure security, the policy decisions of an in-DRAM
tracker must not depend on the access pattern. To that end, we
propose a secure and low-cost in-DRAM tracker called PrIDE,
which consists of a FIFO buffer with probabilistic insertion.
As the policy decisions of PrIDE do not depend on the access
pattern, we develop a framework to calculate the time-to-failure.
Our analysis with DDR5 shows that PrIDE (with 4 entries, 10byte storage) can tolerate Rowhammer thresholds of 1.9K while
guaranteeing per-bank time-to-failure of more than 10,000 years
for all access patterns. We also co-design PrIDE with RFM to
tolerate thresholds as low as 400 with only 1.6% slowdown. To
the best of our knowledge, PrIDE is the ﬁrst low-cost in-DRAM
tracker to achieve provably secure Rowhammer mitigation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The increased inter-cell interference with DRAM scaling
causes Rowhammer [20], whereby rapid activations of a
DRAM row causes bit-ﬂips in neighboring rows. Rowhammer
is a major security threat that can result in system hijacking [1], [4], [6]–[8], [36], [41]. The number of activations
required to induce bit-ﬂips, called the Rowhammer threshold
(TRH), has dropped from 140K [20] to 4.8K [16] over the last
decade. Therefore, we need effective mitigations.
To mitigate Rowhammer, DRAM manufacturers have designed DDR4 devices with an in-DRAM mitigation called
Targeted Row Refresh (TRR). TRR, and many subsequent solutions, rely on a tracking mechanism to identify the aggressor
* Gururaj performed part of this work while he was afﬁliated with NVIDIA.

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00087

1157

Entries Per Bank
0 10

100s 1000s

Low-cost Trackers
(TRR, DSAC, PAT)

DRAM
ACT
Stream

Mitigation
Policy

Security

High

Low-Cost
In-DRAM Trackers
(TRR, DSAC,PAT)

Low

GOAL

Insertion
Policy
Optimal Trackers
(ProTRR, Mithril)

(a) In-DRAM trackers incur high
storage or are non-secure

DRAM
ACT
Stream

PrIDE policies are
access-pattern Independent

Probabilistic
Insertion

Eviction
Policy

Policies driven by activation counts
Unclear worst-case failure-rate, insecure

(b) Hard to ensure low worst-case failure rate
across all patterns (not secure)

Secure

}

FIFO
Mitigation
FIFO
Eviction

Low cost

(c) PrIDE guarantees negligibly low
failure rates across all patterns

Fig. 1. (a) Our goal is to develop secure low-cost trackers. (b) Typical low-cost in-DRAM trackers use counter values to determine policy decisions, which
makes it hard to bound the worst-case failure rate due to dependence on frequencies in the access pattern (c) We propose PrIDE (comprising probabilistic
insertion and FIFO queue), which makes policy decisions independent of access patterns, making it possible to establish the worst-case failure rate.

To analyze the failure rates of trackers, we ﬁrst develop
an abstraction for in-DRAM trackers to reason about them
analytically. We can model an in-DRAM tracker as a multientry structure managed by three policies. First, an insertion
policy, that determines if an accessed row enters the tracker.
Second, an eviction policy, that determines which entry is
evicted to store the incoming entry. Third, a mitigation policy,
that determines which entry gets selected for mitigation.
With three policies, there are three sources of failure. An
aggressor row could encounter a Tracker Insertion Failure
(TIF), wherein the row is never inserted in the tracker within
TRH activations. Similarly, an aggressor row could encounter
Tracker Retention Failure (TRF) where the inserted entry gets
evicted before mitigation. Finally, Tardiness, which indicates
the extra activations a row can receive between insertion and
mitigation, allowing the tracked row to cross TRH activations
while still in the tracker. If we could estimate TIF, TRF, and
Tardiness, we can determine the failure rate of the tracker.
Existing resource-constrained in-DRAM trackers (TRR,
DSAC, PAT) try to emulate optimal trackers, in that they
maintain activation counters in the tracking entries, and use
these counter values to drive at-least one of the three policy decisions. Unfortunately, this also means that the corresponding
failure metrics become dependent on the relative activationcounts of different rows within the access pattern (Figure 1(b)).
This access-pattern dependent nature of failures means it is
hard to a priori determine the worst-case pattern and how often
the tracker will fail for such a pattern. This has allowed the
attackers to craft speciﬁc access-patterns and break the tracker.

N-entry FIFO buffer, where the insertion policy is based on
probabilistic sampling of the request stream. Sampling not
only reduces the number of insertions in the buffer but also
makes the insertion decision independent of the access pattern.
The eviction policy is FIFO, which means an entry can get
evicted (without mitigation) after N insertions into the FIFO
buffer, and is independent of the addresses accessed. Finally,
the mitigation policy is also FIFO, which means the maximum
Tardiness is bounded by the size of the FIFO buffer and the
rate of mitigation (e.g. one mitigation per refresh). We develop
analytical models to estimate TIF and TRF, and a simple linear
equation to bound Tardiness. Our analysis with DDR5 shows
that PrIDE with a 4-entry tracker can handle TRH of 1.92K
per row for a double-sided attack with a guaranteed per-bank
time-to-fail of 10,000+ years across all patterns.
While PrIDE is an in-DRAM mitigation, we also compare
PrIDE with prior probabilistic mitigation PARA [20], at the
Memory Controller (MC). DDR5 supports MC-side mitigation
with Directed Refresh Management (DRFM) [29], however,
DRFM can be performed at most once per two refresh periods [29]. For a double-sided attack, PARA-DRFM can handle
a threshold of 8.5K, compared to 1.92K with PrIDE.
The TRH tolerated by PrIDE depends on the mitigation
rate (we assume 1 mitigation per tREFI). DDR5 introduces
the RFM command, which enables the MC to allot time to
the DRAM chips to perform additional mitigations. We codesign PrIDE with RFM to handle a threshold of 400 per row
in double-sided attack, while incurring only 1.6% slowdown.

Insight: Rather than trying to emulate optimal trackers, lowcost in-DRAM trackers must be designed with policies that
are independent of the access-patterns, and with the goal of
guaranteeing negligibly low failure-rate across all patterns.
Otherwise, these trackers will be broken by speciﬁc patterns.

1) We contend that low-cost trackers must be designed with
the goal of bounded failure rate across all patterns.
2) We observe that the root cause of vulnerability of lowcost in-DRAM trackers is their counter-driven policy
decisions, which makes it hard to bound the failure rates.
3) We propose PrIDE, a simple probabilistic 4-entry tracker
that guarantees low failure rates across all patterns.
PrIDE tolerates a Rowhammer threshold of 1.9K.
4) We co-design PrIDE with RFM to tolerate even lower
thresholds (400) with a slowdown of only 1.6%.

Overall, this paper makes the following contributions:

To this end, this paper proposes PrIDE (Probabilistic InDRAM Tracker), a counterless in-DRAM tracker with a low
bounded failure-rate across any pattern. PrIDE is carefully
designed such that all three policy decisions are not inﬂuenced
by the access pattern, which makes it possible to estimate
the worst-case time-to-failure across all access patterns. Figure 1(c) shows an overview of PrIDE. PrIDE consists of an

To our knowledge, PrIDE is the ﬁrst design to achieve
provably secure Rowhammer mitigation with low-cost inDRAM trackers (requiring just 10-bytes SRAM per bank).

1158

