A SAT Scalpel for Lattice Surgery:
Representation and Synthesis of Subroutines for
Surface-Code Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing
Daniel Bochen Tan∗† , Murphy Yuezhen Niu‡∗ , Craig Gidney∗

arXiv:2404.18369v3 [quant-ph] 30 Aug 2024

∗ Google Quantum AI † University of California, Los Angeles ‡ University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract—Quantum error correction is necessary for largescale quantum computing. A promising quantum error correcting
code is the surface code. For this code, fault-tolerant quantum
computing (FTQC) can be performed via lattice surgery, i.e.,
splitting and merging patches of code. Given the frequent use of
certain lattice-surgery subroutines (LaS), it becomes crucial to
optimize their design in order to minimize the overall spacetime
volume of FTQC. In this study, we define the variables to
represent LaS and the constraints on these variables. Leveraging
this formulation, we develop a synthesizer for LaS, LaSsynth,
that encodes a LaS construction problem into a SAT instance,
subsequently querying SAT solvers for a solution. Starting from
a baseline design, we can gradually invoke the solver with
shrinking spacetime volume to derive more compact designs. Due
to our foundational formulation and the use of SAT solvers,
LaSsynth can exhaustively explore the design space, yielding
optimal designs in volume. For example, it achieves 8% and 18%
volume reduction respectively over two states-of-the-art human
designs for the 15-to-1 T-factory, a bottleneck in FTQC.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum computing received broad interest because it has
the potential to outperform conventional computing on certain
problems. For example, quantum computers are expected to
break the public key cryptosystems that currently secure many
internet transactions [1]. Quantum algorithms use millions or
trillions of operations, but state-of-the-art quantum computers
have gate errors rates ranging from one error per hundreds of
gates to one error per ten thousand gates [2], [3]. This gap can
be crossed using quantum error correction (QEC) [4]–[6].
Among the various QEC codes proposed, the surface code
has emerged as a promising candidate for realizing large-scale
fault-tolerant quantum computation (FTQC) [7]–[9]. In this
code, physical qubits are laid out as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Only
nearest-neighbor connections are required. There are two types
of qubits: data qubits to encode quantum information, and
syndrome qubits to detect errors. In every QEC round, each
syndrome qubit measures a stabilizer which is the parity of the
four neighbor data qubits (or fewer if on boundaries) along the
X or Z basis. With these measurements, errors can be inferred,
tracked, and corrected in the classical control software.
To perform FTQC, we need a scheme of computation acting
on top of the surface code. We opt for lattice surgery [8], [10],
[11] because it has a much lower resource overhead compared
to alternative schemes like braiding [7], [12]. In lattice surgery,
logical qubits are defined on patches of surface code. The
simplest kind of patch is a tile, e.g., the two tiles at the bottom

a)

data qubit
syndrome qubit

b)

…
d
rounds
QEC

…
merge

…

…

QEC
…

Fig. 1.
Fault-tolerant quantum computation based on the surface code.
a) The layout of physical qubits. Red faces stand for four-body or twobody X stabilizers; blue faces are Z stabilizers. We shall use color mapping
(X,Y ,Z) 7→ (R,G,B) in this paper. b) An example logical operation: merging
two separate tiles to a rectangular patch. The stabilizers (faces in a) for the
left tile in the beginning are drawn. d QEC rounds are performed after the
merge. (Some rounds are omitted.) In the 3D spacetime, the boundaries of
code patches (on the qubit plane) sweeping through time produce “pipes”.

of Fig. 1b. A tile has two types of boundaries, X (red) or
Z (blue), predicated by the type of 2-body stabilizer on that
boundary. Tiles can be merged to larger patches. Reversely,
patches can be split to smaller patches. The number of physical
qubits in a tile is d × d, where d is the code distance which is
the length of the longest error chain that can be caught. Since
the merging and splitting in lattice surgery only concern the
boundaries of tiles, we treat a tile as the basic unit in space
in this work, independent from the code distance. Similarly, d
QEC rounds are needed after every layer of operations, so we
treat d QEC rounds as one unit of time. When the boundaries
of patches sweep through time, the FTQC procedure becomes
“pipes” in the 3D spacetime, exemplified by Fig. 1b.
In contrast to previous compilation frameworks from quantum algorithms to lattice surgery [8]–[10], [13]–[16], our
focus is on hyper-optimizing small and frequently-used latticesurgery subroutines (LaS). Our tool is well suited for optimizing basic components with 5-20 qubits and 10-100 operations
like the MAJ and UMA gates in adder circuits [17], or magic
state distillation factories. The intent is that, when assembling
larger computations, the hyper-optimized subroutines created
by our tool can be used as building blocks. This is why, in
the title, we analogize our tool to a scalpel, not a Swiss army
knife. Another major difference with previous approaches is
the removal of human heuristics, aiming for provable optimal-

a)

b)

location:
[1,0,3]

3

direction:
-K

2

z-basis-dir:
J

1

I

1

K

0
1

J

max_i: Int >0
max_j: Int >0
max_k: Int >0
ports: List[Port]
Port:=
location: [Int,Int,Int]
direction: (+|-)(I|J|K)
z_basis_direction: I|J|K
stabilizers: Set[Paulistring]
Paulistring:=
(.|X|Y|Z){len(ports)}

Fig. 2. Lattice-surgery subroutine (LaS). a) Externals of a LaS implementing
a CNOT with four ports and 2 × 2 × 2 volume. b) LaS specification including
volume, port layout, and functionality (stabilizer) information.

ity. Unlike human constructions guided by some overarching
ideas, our tool can explore results that are better but also
highly non-intuitive. The output usually comprises intricate
arrangements of pipes and junctions, challenging to construct
or even comprehend with human intuition.
Fig. 2 provides the specification of LaS. The underlying
surface code substrate is divided into tiles, our unit of space.
The tiles are indexed by spatial (I and J axes) coordinates,
and they can only interact with nearest neighbors. Similar to a
classical circuit component, a LaS takes up a certain area on
the quantum chip, i.e., footprint. In the example of Fig. 2a, we
allow 2 × 2 tiles: (0,0), (0,1), (1,0), and (1,1) in the I-J plane.
A LaS is a procedure instead of a static entity, so it also has a
duration (along K axis). In Fig. 2a, we allow two units of time:
k = 1 and 2, each corresponds to a layer of operations and d
rounds of QEC afterwards. Aligning with existing literature,
we use spacetime volume, i.e., the footprint times the duration,
as our metric for LaS optimization. The volume is indicated
by the half-transparent box in our example. Inside this box are
the operations implementing the function of the LaS. Note that
the LaS specification does not contain what happens inside this
box. Rather, it is the job of a synthesizer or compiler to figure
out a solution satisfying the given specification.
How can we specify the function of a LaS? For a classical
digital circuit, this can be done by a lookup table between
input and output ports. A LaS also has some ports connecting
the given volume to the outside, e.g., the 4 short pipes in
Fig. 2a. We first need to locate these ports, as in the list of
Port in Fig. 2b. The location of a port is the outside
3D grid point it connects to, e.g., (i, j, k) = (1, 0, 3) for the
called-out port in Fig. 2a. Then, the direction of the port
is the direction from this outside point to the inside. In our
example, from (1, 0, 3), we need to go down to enter the box,
so the direction is −K. Finally, because of the two types of
boundaries (red/blue), orientation of a port is also important.
In our example, the blue (Z) boundary is perpendicular to the
J axis, so the value of z-basis-dir is J. The four ports
in Fig. 2a are inputs (bottom) and outputs (top) for control
(left) and target (right) qubits in a CNOT gate. To express
the function of this LaS, the stabilizers in Fig. 2b are
stabilizer flows on its ports: ZI → ZI, IZ → ZZ, XI →

LaSsynth: LaS 1 LaSre: LaS visualization 3D pipe
LaS
synthesizer
representation
specification
diagram
5
2, 3
6
bounds
Stim ZX 4 stabilizer
existing
ZX
verification
design
diagram
Fig. 3. Overview of contributions (blue numbers). Solid arrows represent the
main workflow. Dashes show the verification workflow for existing designs.

XX, and IX → IX.1 Note that these stabilizer flows are on
the logical level, not to be confused with stabilizers measured
on the physical level (inside tiles) in QEC rounds.
Our main task is to generate valid LaS given a specification above covering allowed volume, port configurations, and
stabilizers to satisfy. An overview of this paper is provided in
Fig. 3. The main contributions are identified as follows.
1 Representation. Previous FTQC compilation works have
introduced instruction sets atop lattice surgery, such as multiqubit π/8-rotations and measurements [8], or a more general
‘planar quantum ISA’ [13]. A main effort is decomposing
arbitrary quantum algorithms into these instruction sets, which
then straightforwardly unroll to known lattice surgery implementations. While this abstraction layer of instruction set is
necessary for efficiently compiling large-scale algorithms, it
falls short when optimizing limited-scale LaS, as it cannot
explore all potential combinations of lattice surgery. In this
work, we present the first LaS representation, LaSre, at the
native lattice surgery level, such that merging and splitting can
potentially happen between any adjacent patches in the plane
at any time, thus breaking the previous abstraction layer.
2 Formulation. Some validity constraints are required to
ensure that LaS expressed in our representation are valid.
For instance, two adjacent patches can only merge by the
same type of boundary. In the merge illustrated by Fig. 1b,
this constraint means the two pipes need to have the same
color of boundaries (blue) facing each other. Beyond validity,
we also need to impose some functionality constraints such
that the resulting LaS realizes the stabilizer flows in the
specification. This is done by keeping track of objects named
correlation surfaces [12], [19] (detailed later). In summary,
our formulation establishes a comprehensive set of constraints
for the LaS synthesis problem based on our representation.
3 Synthesizer. Based on our formulation, we build LaSsynth,
a software that transforms LaS synthesis into satisfiability
(SAT) and queries SAT solvers for solutions. Given a LaS
specification like Fig. 2b, the synthesizer either concludes
that it is impossible to implement (UNSAT) or produces a
satisfying variable assignment. Existing designs provide us
with concrete upper bounds in space and time to implement
certain LaS. In order for further optimization, we can start
from these bounds, and iteratively generate and solve LaS
1 An n-qubit Clifford can be represented by a matrix (a transition from state
vectors to state vectors), but also can be defined by 2n stabilizer flows [18],
e.g., if U † (Z ⊗I)U = Z ⊗I, U † (I ⊗Z)U = Z ⊗Z, U † (X ⊗I)U = X ⊗X,
and U † (I ⊗ X)U = I ⊗ X, then the 2-qubit U must be a CNOT.

