HADES: Hardware-Assisted Distributed Transactions
in the Age of Fast Networks and SmartNICs
Apostolos Kokolis, Antonis Psistakis, Benjamin Reidys, Jian Huang, Josep Torrellas
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{kokolis2,psistaki,breidys2,jianh,torrella}@illinois.edu
Consider distributed transactional storage systems that are
based on Microsoft’s FaRM protocol [12], [21], [22], [71].
They have major software overheads resulting from managing
and checking the read and write sets of transactions—i.e.,
the records that a transaction accesses plus their metadata,
including versions, values, and source nodes. Other overheads
result from the fact that reads and writes are supported at
record granularity—forcing whole-record transfers when only
some fields are needed. Additional software overheads result
from many operations to lock and unlock records, poll for lock
and unlock completion, and re-read records before committing
to check for transaction conflicts. In our analysis, we find that
such overheads are responsible for 60-70% of the execution
time of various workloads in an optimized implementation of
FaRM.
Given the key importance of these workloads for a thriving cloud, and that these trends are only likely to accelerate, in this paper, we introduce new hardware structures
to eliminate high-overhead software operations in distributed
transactional systems. We start by analyzing the sources of
software overhead. Based on the analysis, we propose novel
hardware that includes Bloom filters for a variety of tasks
and smart network interface card (SmartNIC) support for
efficient remote communication. We then develop HADES, a
new optimistic concurrency control (OCC)-based distributed
transactional protocol that leverages this hardware to provide
high-performance distributed transactions. HADES is easy to
use in different transactional systems, as it is agnostic to the
data layout and does not require any extension to the data
records. Finally, we also propose a cheaper, hybrid hardwaresoftware implementation of HADES called HADES-H.
Using a simulation-based evaluation, we show that, compared to an optimized implementation of FaRM, HADES
and HADES-H increase the average throughput of a set of
distributed transactional workloads by 2.7× and 2.3×, respectively. Further, HADES shows scalability with 200 cores.
Overall, this paper’s contributions are:
• Identifying and analyzing the main sources of software
overhead in a state-of-the-art distributed transactional system.
• New hardware structures to eliminate these overheads and
allow for large distributed transactions.
• Two new distributed transactional protocols, HADES and
HADES-H, that use this hardware to provide fast distributed
transactions.

Abstract—Transactional-based distributed storage applications
such as key-value stores and databases are widely used in the
cloud. Recently, the hardware on which these applications run
has been rapidly improving, with faster networks and powerful
network interface cards (NICs). A result of these hardware
advances is that the inefficiencies of distributed software have
become increasingly obvious.
To address this problem, we analyze the sources of software
overhead in these distributed transactional applications and propose new hardware structures to eliminate them. The proposed
hardware includes Bloom filters for a variety of tasks and
SmartNICs for efficient remote communication. We then develop
HADES, a new distributed transactional protocol that leverages
this hardware to support low-overhead distributed transactions.
We also propose a hybrid hardware-software implementation
of HADES. Our evaluation shows that HADES increases the
throughput of distributed transactional workloads by 2.7× on
average over a state-of-the-art distributed transactional system.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Distributed storage systems such as key-value stores and
databases are particularly important to the cloud infrastructure
[11], [14], [18], [45], [51], [67]. These applications ensure
that distributed data is safely stored and accessible to users on
demand. Many of these storage systems use the transactional
model, whereby queries are written as transactions that either
complete or fail without leaving any side effect. Using transactions in storage systems is very popular [1], [2], [21], [22],
[35], as it results in simpler application design.
Recently, the cloud hardware infrastructure has been rapidly
improving. Networking hardware has become steadily faster.
Both commercial [28], [48] and custom-designed network
solutions have substantially reduced the round-trip latency of
node-to-node communication—to under one microsecond in a
data center [76]. Moreover, network interface cards (NICs) are
including progressively more advanced hardware support [24],
[42], [46], [47], [49]. Such support can enable the development of efficient RDMA operations, reducing communication
overheads and off-loading work from the processor.
A result of these hardware changes is that the existing
inefficiencies of distributed software protocols are becoming
increasingly obvious. Applications wait for short times that
cannot be effectively hidden using current hardware and
software latency-hiding techniques (i.e., the well-documented
killer microsecond [6], [13]). More importantly for our analysis, protocols have hefty housekeeping software overheads on
the critical path that limit their performance.

1

• A performance evaluation of HADES and HADES-H with
up to 200 cores.

For the writes, even though a write only modifies part of
a record, the system needs to first read the whole record
before the write, and then apply the update. Both local and
remote writes are buffered in the Write Set until the transaction
commits. The transaction’s Write Set includes the version,
address, and data of all the written records.
Validation Phase. The coordinator needs to confirm that
the transaction does not conflict with any other transaction
executing on the local or remote nodes. For this reason,
it first locks the local and remote parts of its Write Set.
This can be done using the Compare-and-Swap (CAS) and
RDMA CAS, respectively. Once locking succeeds, it can be
determined whether the transaction can be serialized. Then,
the coordinator fetches the data versions of all the records
read, re-reads their current version numbers, and compares
them to the versions that were read during Execution. The
goal is to identify conflicts. If the versions have not changed,
the transaction proceeds to Commit. Otherwise, the transaction
is aborted and re-executed.
Commit Phase. The data versions of all the written records
are updated, and the writes are performed for both local and
remote records. After that, the local and remote parts of the
Write Set are unlocked to allow future accesses.

II. BACKGROUND
Distributed transactional systems are a key component of
the infrastructure in modern data centers [18], [22], [33],
[40], [60], [72], [74]. They enable multiple clients to concurrently access shared data structures across distributed servers.
To attain high concurrency and performance for distributed
transactions, state-of-the-art systems usually leverage RDMA
primitives to enable fast remote data accesses [12], [21],
[22], [71]. To ensure that concurrent transactions execute in
a proper way, these systems use a distributed transactional
protocol [27], [29]. They augment the data records with extra
fields that the software uses to manage the structures. A
typical example is shown in Figure 1. In this case, a record is
augmented with fields that include the record version, a lock,
the incarnation to detect whether the record has been freed,
and a per-cache-line version VCi to support OCC and conflict
detection between concurrent transactions that operate on the
same record.
Version Lock Incarnation VC1 | cacheline

…

VCN | cacheline

III. E XISTING S OFTWARE OVERHEADS

Fig. 1: Augmented record to support transactions in a typical
distributed transactional system.

We implemented an optimized version of distributed transactions based on the Microsoft FaRM protocol [21], [22].
We included optimizations as described in similar papers,
including: (1) batching of messages [12], [71], [72] (i.e.,
sending lock/unlock operations to remote nodes in a batch
during validation), (2) sending writes and unlock messages
without serialization to avoid stalls [71], (3) not stalling while
waiting for unlock operations [12], [71], [72], and (4) avoiding
locking the read set during validation [12]. We designed the
records of the key-value store as shown in Figure 1. We
instrumented the code to capture the software overheads.
The left column of Table I lists the major sources of
software overhead that we have seen in our optimized software
implementation (called SW-Impl). The first source is managing
the read and write sets of transactions. The Read Set of a
transaction is the set of records that the transaction reads plus
their metadata. The Write Set is the set of records that the
transaction writes, the values written, and the metadata. In
SW-Impl, writing a record involves two reads and two writes:
a read of the record and metadata (from either a remote or a
local node), then a write to the write set, and then, at commit,
a read from the write set and a write to the final location.
SW-Impl also adds other software overheads in every write
and read. Specifically, before performing a record write, the
software needs to update the record’s version. Further, on a
record read, the software needs to check that all its cache
lines have the same version. This is a check for atomicity, to
ensure that there is no transaction writing to the record while
the record is being read. This means that one cannot do zerocopy reads: one reads into a temporary location, checks the
versions, and then copies the record to the destination location.

Typically, a transactional protocol has three main phases:
Execution, Validation, and Commit. Figure 2 shows a phaseby-phase example of an optimized software protocol. Here, a
coordinator node executes a transaction with a mix of accesses
to the memory of the local and remote nodes. Records A and
C are read, while B and D are written.
EXECUTION PHASE
Coordinator
Node
[records: A, B] read
write
write
local(A)

Remote Node 1
[record: C]

Remote Node 2
[record: D]

local(B) remote(D)

VALIDATION PHASE

COMMIT PHASE

lock (B)

apply
updates(B)

(includes
read(B))

read
remote(C)

read &
validate(A)

unlock(B)

read &
validate(C)
read

remote(D)

lock(D)

Serialization
Point

apply
updates(D)

unlock(D)

Fig. 2: Typical protocol for distributed transactions.
Execution Phase. Accesses to local records are performed
locally, while accesses to remote ones are executed by sending
RDMA operations to the nodes that have the records. All reads
are recorded in the transaction’s Read Set with the version of
the records. Transactional systems usually operate at recordlevel granularity. As a result, before a read can be recorded
in the Read Set, the atomicity of the read must be validated.
This involves checking that all the cache lines of the record
have the same version and, therefore, no write is interfering.

2

