HiFi-DRAM: Enabling High-fidelity DRAM Research
by Uncovering Sense Amplifiers with IC Imaging
Michele Marazzi∗ , Tristan Sachsenweger∗ , Flavien Solt∗ , Peng Zeng∗ ,
Kubo Takashi† , Maksym Yarema∗ and Kaveh Razavi∗
∗ ETH Zürich † Zentel Japan

of research. We find that the majority of these studies make
inaccurate assumptions about sense amplifiers, resulting in
significant errors when estimating the impact of their proposed
changes. We formulate recommendations based on our findings
to enable high-fidelity DRAM research in the future.

Abstract—DRAM vendors do not disclose the architecture of the
sense amplifiers deployed in their chips. Unfortunately, this hinders
academic research that focuses on studying or improving DRAM.
Without knowing the circuit topology, transistor dimensions, and
layout of the sense amplifiers, researchers are forced to rely
on best guesses, impairing the fidelity of their studies. We aim
to fill this gap between academia and industry for the first
time by performing Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) with
Focused Ion Beam (FIB) on recent commodity DDR4 and DDR5
DRAM chips from the three major vendors. This required us to
adequately prepare the samples, identify the sensing area, and
align images from the different FIB slices. Using the acquired
images, we reverse engineer the circuits, measure transistor
dimensions and extract physical layouts of sense amplifiers — all
previously unavailable to researchers. Our findings show that
the commonly assumed classical sense amplifier topology has
been replaced with the more sophisticated offset-cancellation
design by two of the three major DRAM vendors. Furthermore,
the transistor dimensions of sense amplifiers and their revealed
physical layouts are significantly different than what is assumed
in existing literature. Given commodity DRAM, our analysis
shows that the public DRAM models are up to 9x inaccurate,
and existing research has up to 175x error when estimating the
impact of the proposed changes. To enable high-fidelity DRAM
research in the future, we open source our data, including the
reverse engineered circuits and layouts.

Research accuracy. DRAM provides cheap and low-latency
memory based on capacitors. The transition between the
analogue world of capacitors and the digital world is performed
by sense amplifiers. Sense amplifiers enhance the extremely
weak signals stored in capacitors while adhering to strict
timings [38]. Their design and topology must be reliable
towards process manufacturing variability and noise, yet
strongly optimized to keep high die efficiency [32]. Research
based on modifying sense amplifiers depends on three factors
for its accuracy and validity: (i) the employed sense amplifier
circuit, commonly assumed to be the classical design, (ii) the
transistor dimensions, as circuits with overly large transistors
will be optimistic towards their reliability, and (iii) complying
with existing layouts, given that the sense amplifier region is a
highly optimized area, adding new components should be done
with care to achieve realistic area overheads. Unfortunately,
information on these crucial factors that are necessary for highfidelity DRAM research is not publicly available to researchers.
This paper aims to fill this gap for the first time.

I. I NTRODUCTION
DRAM is the target of many research efforts from academia
every year with the sense amplifier being the fundamental
section most commonly modified and simulated [2], [5], [13]–
[15], [22], [26], [28], [29], [58], [66], [68], [74], [75], [78], [85],
[87], [88], [93], [94], [97], [111]–[113]. Unfortunately, DRAM
vendors keep the internal architecture of sense amplifiers in
their chips a secret. As a result, researchers are forced to
make assumptions and speculate over crucial design factors,
impacting the accuracy of their results. We aim to fill this
gap by imaging, and subsequently reverse engineering, sense
amplifier circuits on modern DDR4 and DDR5 devices.
Existing research commonly assumes commodity DRAM to
employ the classical sense amplifier circuit, which we show not
to be the case in DRAM chips from two of three major DRAM
vendors. Instead, their sense amplifiers include new components
and events to perform offset-compensating operations for
reliable DRAM operation with smaller technology nodes. Furthermore, we obtain crucial information concerning deployed
sense amplifiers, such as transistor dimensions and physical
layout. Using this knowledge, we systematically analyze the
feasibility and accuracy of DRAM studies spanning a decade

DRAM reverse engineering. We perform high-resolution chip
imaging to reverse engineer the sense amplifier region in six
commodity DDR4 and DDR5 devices from the three major
DRAM vendors. For the first time, we report circuit topologies,
transistor dimensions, and layouts of sense amplifiers on
modern commodity DRAM devices. To this end, we combine
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) aided with Focused Ion
Beam (FIB) to obtain cross-section images from the samples.
Performing SEM/FIB requires adequate sample preparation and
the identification of the sensing areas. We then perform a highly
sensitive image alignment and noise cancellation on the crosssection images, allowing us to obtain a planar view of the sense
amplifier region. Using the planar view images, we reverse
engineer the circuit topology by performing a multi-dimension
inter- and intra-layer mapping.
HiFi-DRAM. We seek to enable high-fidelity DRAM research
using our reverse engineered data. We start by comparing
our findings to existing DRAM models, discovering that
they employ transistors with dimensions up to 9x different
than our samples counterpart. Then, we analyze existing

1

studies that propose to modify the sense amplifier region. We
DRAM chip
Banks
find three major inaccuracies. First, these studies consider DIMM
inaccurate sense amplifier designs, hence their modifications
Logic
do not always apply to more modern devices. Second, the
pad
addition of new elements assumes free space in existing MAT
chips which we find not to be the case in our samples.
Capacitor
Sense amplifiers
Third, these proposals do not consider the physical layout of
sense amplifiers, underestimating the impact of the proposed
changes. Considering these inaccuracies, we find that existing
studies can have up to 175x errors in their original estimations
when considering modern commodity DRAM. Based on these
findings, we formulate a set of recommendations to improve the Row drivers
Rows
Sense amplifier regions Bitlines
fidelity of future DRAM research. As an example, future studies
must avoid focusing on a single sense amplifier in isolation, Fig. 1. A DIMM contains several DRAM chips, each made of multiple banks.
since we find that multiple sense amplifiers are interconnected A bank has many MATs, filled with capacitors. Capacitors are connected to
SAs via bitlines after they are selected by rows. SAs are in between MATs.
in modern DRAM chips.
Contributions. The following summarizes our contributions: a
Equalizer Precharge
BL Column Latch
1. Using high-resolution IC imaging, we reverse engineer the
SA
sense amplifiers of modern commodity DRAM devices
LA
LAB
VPRE
Yi
Yi
PEQ
from the three major vendors on both DDR4 and DDR5
Row MAT
BLB
devices.
Control line
c
2. We report on important properties of sense amplifiers in b
Charge sharing
1
our samples such as their circuitry, transistor dimensions
BL
V
BL
BL
PEQ
and physical layouts.
LIO
2 Latch & Rest.
3. We evaluate 13 papers that aim to modify sense amplifiers LA
LAB Yi
VPRE
BL
using our reverse engineered information to identify
LIOB
BLB
inaccuracies and formulate recommendations for highPRE & EQ
3
Column
BL Vpre
fidelity DRAM research in the future.
pSA
PRE and EQ nSA
BLB
Open sourcing. The extracted information including IC images,
reversed engineered circuits, transistor dimensions and physical Fig. 2. Latch, equalizer, precharge and column are the main sense amplifier
layouts can be reached via https://comsec.ethz.ch/hifi-dram.
elements (a). In the classic circuit (b), PEQ activates both precharge and
equalization. After a row activation, the classic circuit events (c) are charge
sharing (1), and latching & restore (2). A precharge makes bitlines connect to
Vpre (PRE) and to each others (EQ) (3).

II. BACKGROUND
We introduce the DRAM architecture and sense amplifier
topologies (II-A) before summarizing research that aims at
modifying DRAM sense amplifiers (II-B).

controller specifies a subset of these bits (or capacitors) with
the column address. Before activating another row, the memory
controller must issue a precharge to deactivate the current row.

A. DRAM and Sense Amplifier Topologies
Commodity DRAM is available as chips complying with
the DDR protocol, standardized by JEDEC [37], [38]. DRAM
used in servers and desktops is usually assembled as multiple identical DRAM chips on dual-inline memory modules
(DIMMs) [35], [36].
Physical organization. Internally, a DRAM chip has a hierarchical structure made of banks (Fig. 1), each made of
multiple MATs that generally contain between half to a million
capacitors [25], [51], [68]. Each capacitor in a MAT stores
one bit of memory and is identified by the combination of
a column, row, and bank address supplied by the memory
controller. The MATs are surrounded by row drivers in one
direction, and by sense amplifiers (SAs) in the other (Fig. 1).
When the memory controller accesses memory, it first activates
a specific row of a MAT. With a row activation, the capacitors
in a MAT are connected via bitlines to the SAs of both sides.
The connections are interleaved, resulting in half connections
towards each side. Then, to perform reads or writes, the memory

Sense amplifiers. SAs are analog circuits that amplify the
weak signals stored in the capacitors. Their design determines
the speed of a DRAM chip and must avoid data failures. It
is hence a contemporary research topic [8], [32], [41], [44]–
[46], [53], [55], [56], [59], [60], [69], [71], [76], [90], [92],
[96], [110], [116]. A SA operates by comparing two bitlines,
one that is perturbated by the capacitor of the activated row
(BL), and one that is the reference (bitline bar or BLB).
The reference bitline comes from the MAT opposite to the
activated MAT (Fig. 1). This is referred to as an open bitline
scheme, currently known to be the most compact scheme and
considered the standard [95]. The prime elements of SAs are
latch circuits (Fig. 2a). Once activated by control lines LA
and LAB, the latch circuits amplify and lock the difference
between BL and BLB. Then, a column selector multiplexes
the latched data from a particular SA (selected by control line
Yi). Finally, equalizer and precharge circuits restore the SA

2

