Harpocrates: Breaking the Silence of CPU Faults
through Hardware-in-the-Loop Program Generation
Nikos Karystinos§
George Papadimitriou§

Odysseas Chatzopoulos§
Dimitris Gizopoulos§

George-Marios Fragkoulis§
Sudhanva Gurumurthi†

§

University of Athens, Department of Informatics and Telecomm., Computer Architecture Lab, Greece
{n.karystinos | od.chatzopoulos | gm.fragkoulis | georgepap | dgizop}@di.uoa.gr
†
RAS Architecture, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc, Austin, Texas, USA, sudhanva.gurumurthi@amd.com

Abstract—Several hyperscalers have recently disclosed the
occurrence of Silent Data Corruptions (SDCs) in their systems
fleets, sparking concerns about the severity of known and the
existence of unidentified root causes of faults in CPUs. These
incidents reveal that CPU chips have the potential to generate
incorrect results for different tasks due to latent manufacturing
defects, variability, marginalities, bugs, and aging. To tackle
this problem, we present Harpocrates, an automated methodology for the generation of short, constrained-random functional
test programs that maximize fault detection in target CPU
structures and can be employed at different stages of system
lifetime. Harpocrates stands out by adopting a hardware-modelin-the-loop approach, which iteratively refines the generated test
programs using a detailed simulation-based microarchitecture
engine. The engine models and grades for multiple hardware
fault types that can lead to data corruptions during system
operation. Harpocrates is versatile and can adapt to various
program generators, ISAs, microarchitectures, and fault types.
Our results on six important CPU hardware structures show
that Harpocrates attains much shorter test generation times than
hardware-agnostic publicly available frameworks and outperforms open-source test suites in terms of fault detection capability.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As modern CPUs become increasingly complex and powerful, their ability to execute demanding workloads and handle
large amounts of data becomes more critical. This complexity
raises the probability of unexpected faults occurring during
data processing increasing the risk of data corruptions, leading
to wrong results, information loss, or system crashes [1]–
[6]. Data corruption in CPUs can occur due to hardware defects and marginalities (e.g., temperature conditions), particle
strikes, hardware design bugs, and even malicious attacks [7].
The risk of data corruption has further increased as CPU
designs have become more complex [3], [8]. Traditional verification and testing methods are often insufficient for detecting
all potential defects and root causes of Silent Data Corruptions (SDCs) in modern CPUs [9]. Shrinking technology,
skyrocketing counts of CPU and memory chips, and new
failure mechanisms all pose extreme reliability challenges.
For example, the emergence of marginal defect-induced [10]
or degrading faults [11] is a major issue, which cannot be
tackled solely relying on conventional manufacturing testing
and screening [12]–[14].
In this context, recent hyperscaler reports suggest high levels
of defective parts per million (DPPM) for CPUs deployed in

DPPM
1000
acceptable
zone
361
0

Hyperscaler [1]

Hyperscaler [2]

Hyperscaler [3]

January 2021

June 2021

October 2023

Fig. 1. Reported CPU defective parts per million (DPPM) by hyperscalers.

their fleets. Fig. 1 shows the values disclosed by [1] (“hundreds
of CPUs detected for SDCs in hundreds of thousands of machines” ≈1,000 DPPM), by [2] (”the order of a few mercurial
cores per several thousand machines” = a bit less than 1,000
DPPM) and recently by [3] (”3.61 CPUs per 10,000” = 361
DPPM). Acceptable values vary across domains: safety-critical
domains (e.g., automotive) require less than 10 DPPM [15],
while general purpose computing in the cloud or HPC can
afford few 100’s DPPM, though driving the DPPM as low
as possible is important as data center deployments scale
out1 . The daunting DPPM values of Fig. 1 call the computing
community to action to verify the rates and better understand
the root causes.
Several hyperscalers [1]–[3] disclosures extend the quest
about the origins of SDCs: from usual suspects (memory,
storage, network) to the heart of the computation: the CPU. In
CPUs the overheads of redundancy (area, performance, power)
and protection decisions for hardware structures are critical. CPUs are traditionally protected against particle-induced
transients (soft errors) using industry best practices such as
AVF (Architectural Vulnerability Factor) modeling [16] to
determine which structures to protect and to what extent. Yet,
with the rise of new defect mechanisms and resulting escaping
faults, vulnerability estimates relying solely on transients as
the primary root cause might not be entirely accurate, potentially increasing the SDC risk. To this end, it is important
for CPU designers and users to employ effective ways for
the detection of potential defects in cores (at manufacturing
as well as in the field) and expose the root causes of data
corruptions.
1 The need to attain very low DPPM was emphasized at recent panels held
at architecture (ISCA), design automation (DAC), testing (ITC) conferences.

CPU fault detection through execution of programs composed of normal instructions has been studied extensively [17]–[27]. This method is known variously as functional
testing, instruction-based testing, software-based testing, or
native mode testing. Unlike structural testing methods employed at manufacturing time placing the CPU in a special
mode (such as scan), functional testing aims at detecting
hardware faults that affect the CPU during normal operating
mode. The generation of efficient functional test programs can
be deterministic or directed random. Grading of the quality of
functional test programs is performed by fault simulation EDA
tools on top of detailed gate-level models of the CPU.
We present Harpocrates2 , a novel methodology and unique
toolchain for the automatic generation and grading of effective
functional test programs for modern CPUs. Harpocrates is
aligned to related industry-led efforts [3], [28]–[31], which
present functional test program generation frameworks for
CPUs. Functional testing of CPUs at native instruction execution mode aims to detect any type of fault before it
manifests in the field and affects user programs. The goal is
to maximize the coverage of the CPU hardware (go through
as much of the hardware as possible) by generating effective
but short test programs. By monitoring the CPU’s behavior
for irregularities (erroneous outputs or crashes) during the
execution of these functional test programs, hardware faults
can be identified and faulty CPUs isolated. Therefore, an
efficient method for generating functional test programs should
ideally be automated and hardware-aware.
For Harpocrates (or any other approach) to be practically
plausible, some important challenges should be addressed:
1) Dealing with modern CPU design and deployment: modern CPUs are complex, with multiple interacting layers
of hardware and software, and therefore all layers should
be considered.
2) Targeting specific hardware structures: most types of
hardware faults tend to be localized in specific structures.
Aiming to be generically applicable, existing frameworks
are hardware-agnostic and do not grade tests on specific
CPU microarchitectures. Localizing the fault is important
for root cause analysis of defective CPUs and provides
valuable field data for driving design improvements in the
next generations.
3) Generating fast functional test programs: both for root
causing (CPU designer) and quick detection (CPU user),
the functional test programs should have short execution
times. Datacenter providers aim for near zero fleet downtime. Test programs (on demand or periodically executed)
should minimally affect downtime; this aspect should be
enhanced in existing frameworks.
Altogether, effective functional program generation for
hardware faults detection should be hardware-aware using
microarchitectural knowledge, consider the full system stack,
and aim at short programs with high fault detection capability.
2 God of silence and secrecy: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harpocrates.

Our method and tools framework Harpocrates is a novel
contributor to these challenges, by:
1) Developing a constrained-random program generator and
mutator called MuSeqGen (Mutator and Sequence Generator). MuSeqGen’s code generator is built on MicroProbe [32], an established framework for the generation
of assembly-level programs for POWER and RISC-V
architectures. MuSeqGen extends the ISA support to
x86-64 and, more importantly, offers versatile utilities
for configurable random generation under any set of
constraints. MuSeqGen integrates a mutation engine that
alters or combines generated sequences to generate refined variants of programs. (Challenges #2, #3).
2) Increasing the hardware coverage and the detection capability of generated programs to hardware faults by
employing a hardware-in-the-loop approach: a detailed
CPU model using the gem5 simulator. Gem5, and the
tooling built around it, is a key piece of Harpocrates
in grading and refining the automatically generated programs. (Challenges #1, #2, #3).
3) Proposing a feedback-based automated methodology for
the generation of functional programs. The methodology
comprises three distinct components: (i) the Generator,
(ii) the Mutator, and (iii) the Evaluator, which, together,
construct the full Harpocrates program generation loop.
(Challenges #1, #2).
Harpocrates is optimized for high throughput of functional
test program generation and delivers fast programs with high
fault detection ability. We demonstrate its effectiveness in
detecting different faults in multiple hardware structures of a
modern x86 CPU in which it excels in terms of fault detection
capability and speed compared to both open-source programs
and regular benchmark workloads we evaluate.
II. BACKGROUND : E SSENTIAL C ONCEPTS AND
D EFINITIONS
A. Silent Data Corruptions (SDCs)
SDCs have become a common concern, impacting critical
infrastructures [1], [5], [33]. They are now increasingly linked
to CPU chips alongside memory, storage, and networking.
These corruptions are termed ’silent’ because they escape
hardware-level detection mechanisms, causing errors that may
propagate through the system unnoticed until they manifest
as application-level issues, leading to potential data loss [1],
[2]. SDCs may arise from various factors like soft errors,
manufacturing defects, and design flaws. They often go unnoticed since the software does not always check for them,
especially in cloud and data center environments. Redundancy
methods, such as duplicating or triplicating execution, can help
mitigate SDCs, but they come with performance and power
costs. Both software and hardware-based redundancy methods
are expensive in terms of performance, power, and design
complexities.

