A Tale of Two Domains: Exploring Efficient
Architecture Design for Truly Autonomous Things
Xiaofeng Hou †

Tongqiao Xu †

Chao Li

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
hou-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
tqxu23@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
lichao@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Cheng Xu

Jiacheng Liu

Yang Hu

Jieru Zhao

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
jerryxu@sjtu.edu.cn

CUHK
Hong Kong, China
jcliu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
hu_yang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
zhao-jieru@sjtu.edu.cn

Jingwen Leng

Kwang-Ting Cheng

Minyi Guo

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
leng-jw@sjtu.edu.cn

HKUST
Hong Kong, China
timcheng@ust.hk

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract—Autonomous Things (AuT) refers to a collection
of self-sufficient tiny devices capable of performing intelligent
computations. Looking ahead, AuT promises to enable ubiquitous
deployment of intelligence on many emerging consumer electronics
and mission-critical infrastructures. Nevertheless, there is an
important research gap to date: architecting efficient AuT
systems requires both energy autonomy (EA) and inference
autonomy (IA). In other words, practical AuT application scenarios
necessitate tailored architectures with significantly expanded
inference performance and more efficient use of energy.
We present CHRYSALIS, a novel automated EA/IA co-design
methodology for autonomous things. It aims to guide the transition
from a traditional EA-only and IA-only design approach to
a truly AuT-oriented architecture design. To fully understand
the interrelationship between the EA domain and the IA
domain, CHRYSALIS first introduces an architectural modeling
framework encompassing every key AuT module involving energy
harvesting, intermittent execution, and accelerator control. Based
on the holistic system model, we design an intelligent architecture
generation tool that can help find the ideal design for targeted AuT
scenarios adhering to different SWaP (Size, Weight and Power)
constraints. To validate our work, we use CHRYSALIS for fast
construction and exploration of efficient AuT design and pre-RTL
design in representative AuT scenarios. Extensive evaluation shows
that CHRYSALIS outperforms state-of-the-art designs and our
proposed technique shows 56.4% better performance on average.
We believe that the methodology and tools developed in this paper
will foster the development of more performant and practical
architectures in the upcoming AuT era.
Index Terms—Edge Artificial Intelligence, Autonomous Embedded Systems, Intermittent Computing, Accelerator, Deep Learning

I. I NTRODUCTION
Autonomous things (AuT), or Internet of Autonomous
Things (IoAT), is emerging as a catalyst for a transformative
†These two authors contribute equally to the work.

edge computing paradigm [16], [22], [61], [63]. Some types
of AuT, including wearable devices and specialized sensors,
could empower users with intelligent computing services in
a highly sustainable and efficient manner in the wild [23],
[72]. In certain circumstances, such as data analytics during a
worldwide pandemic or continuous volcano hazards monitoring,
AuT would perform tasks much more economically and safely
than human labor [6], [51]. Today, many countries on our planet
are actively accelerating their development and deployment
of various autonomous devices for smart control of traffic,
street lights, transportation of goods and waste disposal [16].
Looking ahead, spaceflight and deep space exploration require
more powerful space-based IoAT for computation autonomy.
A true AuT system must achieve two unique goals: energy
autonomy (EA) and inference autonomy (IA). The former means
battery-free and self-powered, allowing the system to get rid
of bulky energy storage devices; and the latter refers to the
ability to perform in-situ AI computation, thus eliminating the
dependency on additional remote computing engine. Ideally,
AuT systems can diligently accumulate energy capacity from
ambient energy resources to support scenario-aware edge AI
applications. Due to power variability, the actual AuT systems
have to frequently resort to intermittent AI computation, the
performance and efficiency of which heavily rely on both
energy capacity and inference capability.
Currently, early-stage autonomous systems still suffer from
poor performance and low efficiency. They rely on traditional
energy-harvesting based IoT devices (EH-IoT) which are governed by microcontroller units (MCUs) such as MSP430x [9],
[30], [31], [50]. These devices have severely constrained computational capabilities rendering them inadequate for running
computationally intensive AI inference tasks [24]. Oftentimes,

EH-IoT devices choose to offload large amounts of data to
external servers. It results in increased power consumption and
operational expenditure due to region-wide communication.
Meanwhile, although extensive work has been done on
edge AI accelerators and micro datacenters in recent years
[8], [15], [38], their superior computational capabilities are
limited to stable power environments [8], [38]. In scenarios
with depleted energy capacity, they frequently encounter power
exceptions, leading to reduced efficiency or unavailability [49].
Equipping existing high-performance edge AI accelerators
with a large energy subsystem, such as oversized solar panels
and capacitors, would enhance the inference speed of DNNs. Figure 1: An ideal AuT harnesses the synergy of EH-IoT and
Doing so unavoidably introduces longer charging latency and Edge AI to enable full autonomy in both computing capability
and power supply.
increased energy leakage [50], [59], ultimately reducing the
efficiency and practicality of AuTs. On the other hand, simply incorporates various hardware and software components, along
reducing the size of accelerators to match the capacity of with configurable parameters within the energy subsystem and
ambient energy is an alternative approach. However, it sacrifices inference subsystems. Our framework employs a bi-level search
inference accuracy, computing performance, and data reuse strategy to efficiently explore alternative architectures and
opportunities [9], [31]. Additionally, it may introduce more identify the most suitable solution for scenario customization.
The significance of CHRYSALIS lies in its ability to speedup
overhead in saving the inference checkpoints.
In this paper, we argue that the co-design of energy autonomy the transition from traditional EA-oriented and IA-oriented
and inference autonomy is non-trivial, and there is an important design to a new class of AuT-oriented holistic design. Moreover,
research gap at the architecture level. It is imperative to it serves as a valuable tool for exploring and guiding the design
develop a comprehensive methodology that accurately describes of more powerful AuT devices suitable for versatile edge
the interrelationship between the energy subsystem and the applications. Overall, we make the following contributions:
inference subsystem as well as their implications on the
1) We analyze the characteristics of AuT and identify the
performance and efficiency of intermittent inference.
limitations of existing architectures. We propose a novel
Specifically, the architecture design for an AuT system
methodology for the comprehensive modeling of AuT
encompasses numerous hardware and software modules of
systems. It can effectively capture the dependencies
both the energy subsystem and inference subsystem, with each
among different AuT subsystems and assess the impact
module offering a large number of configurations. Iterating over
of various combinations on AuT intermittent inference.
the configurations of these components yields an explosion
2) We develop an automated AuT architecture generation
of possible combinations, ranging from tens of thousands to
tool that enables the evaluation of AuT system perforbillions. Furthermore, many AuT systems are part of missionmance under different architecture alternatives. This tool
critical infrastructures in land, sea, air, and space. Each of
efficiently generates ideal architectural solutions tailored
the AuT faces rigorous and specific Space, Weight, and
to specific domain-specific tasks in an automated way.
Power (SWaP) constraints that span the entire computing
3) We showcase the utility of CHRYSALIS and demonstrate
stack [48]. These constraints further complicate the design
its capability to enhance the performance of existing AuT
process. Previous EH-IoT research has dedicated effort to
devices while designing customized architecture for more
designing the parameters of various DNN inference components
AuT applications. Our experimental results reveal that
to suit specific tasks [2], [9], [33], [50], [59]. However,
the architectures obtained through CHRYSALIS exhibit
conventional design space exploration methods [37], [42],
an average performance improvement of 56.4%.
[53], [70] fall short of meeting the general requirements
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
of AuT design. They neither consider intermittent inference II presents the background and motivation. Next, Section III
scenarios nor account for the exponential growth of architecture describes the design of CHRYSALIS. Then, Section IV and
candidates resulting from the co-design of energy autonomy. Section V show the experimental methodology and result. After
We introduce CHRYSALIS, a set of new techniques designed that, Section VI summarizes the related work. Finally, Section
to generate the ideal AuT architectures that meet specific VII concludes the paper.
SWaP constraints. We first propose a comprehensive modeling
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
approach that captures the interrelationship between the energy
subsystems and the inference subsystems. Our AuT-oriented
The autonomous things (AuT) features distinctive operation
approach evaluates different modules for both energy autonomy mode, as shown in Figure 1. EH-IoT puts an emphasis on
and inference autonomy, assessing their impact on energy utilizing ambient energy for achieving energy autonomy in
consumption and computing performance during intermit- some simple data collection tasks. Edge AI ensures in-situ
tent inference. Leveraging this model, we further develop inference autonomy by integrating high-performance DNN
an automated AuT architecture generation framework that accelerators. Differently, AuT is expect to exhibit a synergism

