© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of
any copyrighted component of this work in other works. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00075

Memento: An Adaptive, Compiler-Assisted Register
File Cache for GPUs
Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary, Jose Maria Arnau, Jordi Tubella Murgadas, Antonio Gonzalez
Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
0

Abstract—Modern GPUs require an enormous register file
(RF) to store the context of thousands of active threads. It consumes considerable energy and contains multiple large banks to
provide enough throughput. Thus, a RF caching mechanism can
significantly improve the performance and energy consumption
of the GPUs by avoiding reads from the large banks that consume
significant energy and may cause port conflicts.
This paper introduces an energy-efficient RF caching mechanism called Memento that repurposes an existing component
in GPUs’ RF to operate as a cache in addition to its original
functionality. In this way, Memento minimizes the overhead of
adding a RF cache to GPUs. Besides, Memento leverages an issue
scheduling policy that utilizes the reuse distance of the values in
the RF cache and is controlled by a dynamic algorithm. The goal
is to adapt the issue policy to the runtime program characteristics
to maximize the GPU’s performance and the hit ratio of the RF
cache. The reuse distance is approximated by the compiler using
profiling and is used at run time by the proposed caching scheme.
We show that Memento reduces the number of reads to the RF
banks by 46.4% and the dynamic energy of the RF by 28.3%.
Besides, it improves performance by 6.1% while adding only 2KB
of extra storage per core to the baseline RF of 256KB, which
represents a negligible overhead of 0.78%.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

greater than 10

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
rodinia_3.1

Deepbench

Fig. 1: Reuse distance of register values used at least once

from bank conflicts because their Streaming Multiprocessor
(SM) is partitioned into sub-cores [11]. Each sub-core has
private RF banks, OCUs, issue schedulers, and execution
units (EUs) [11], [48], [49], [51]–[55]. Partitioning SM into
sub-cores reduces the area and energy of the SM [50] but
increases the chance of bank conflicts [11]. For instance, Volta
architecture has only 2 RF banks per sub-core [23] which has
a high probability of bank conflicts.
A naı̈ve solution to tackle severe bank conflicts in subcores is to increase the number of OCUs. However, scaling the
number of OCUs has a high overhead. The overhead is due
to requiring a bigger crossbar, which delivers read operands
from banks to the OCUs, and more operand buffering storage
of added OCUs. For example, increasing the number of OCUs
per sub-core from 2 to 8 improves performance by 7.1% on
average but increases the area and power of the RF by 1.74×
and 2.83× respectively [11].
A recently proposed issue scheduler tackles the bank conflict problem in sub-cores and avoids the overhead of scaling
OCUs [11]. However, it only addresses the bank conflict
problem, not the high energy consumption of reading operands
from the large RF banks. A possible solution that reduces both
the bank conflicts and energy consumption of the RF is using
an energy-efficient RF cache, that is small and closer to the
Execution Units (EUs), and thus, more energy efficient than
the large RF banks to serve read requests. It also reduces bank
conflicts when a request is served directly from the cache since
it does not need to be sent to the RF banks.
Previous works, referred to as BOW [18], RFC [20],
software RFC [21], and LTRF [63], propose a RF cache
for GPUs that unlike modern GPUs do not have sub-cores
and do not support Tensor Cores. Sub-cores have been the
trend for SM architectures since their appearance in Maxwell
architecture [48]–[54], [56]. Tensor cores are also an indispensable accelerator in modern GPUs for General Matrix
Multiplication (GEMM) operations [48], [49], [52], [54], [56],
the building block for modern machine learning and linear
algebra computations. These previous proposals, as we will

I. I NTRODUCTION AND M OTIVATION
Modern GPUs implement fine-grain context switching by
relying on a large register file (RF) that stores the context of
a very large number of active threads. As the RF is huge and
serves many read/write requests, it also contributes to a considerable share of dynamic energy consumption. For instance,
NVIDIA V100 architecture has a 20MB RF, representing 56%
of on-chip storage, [54] which consumes about 24% of the
dynamic energy of the chip [27].
The RF must also deliver high bandwidth as well as large
capacity. Therefore, it consists of enormous single-ported
banks to avoid the area and energy overhead of many ports
required for high throughput [72]. Read requests to the same
bank are serialized, which affects read bandwidth and latency.
Applications that are more sensitive to operand read bandwidth would be more penalized by bank conflicts. Conventionally, GPUs solve this issue by serving concurrently the operand
read requests from different instructions to better utilize the
banks’ read bandwidth. To implement this, the RF has several
Operand Collector Units (OCUs) [39], each of which buffers
source operands of one instruction before being dispatched to
execution. Each OCU is responsible for fetching and storing
the source operands of the allocated instruction.
Although OCUs reduce the bank conflict’s detrimental effect, many of them are needed to overcome the severe bank
conflict issue of modern GPUs. Modern GPUs suffer more

1

1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

monolithic RFC
monolithic software RFC
sub-core RFC
sub-core software RFC

Fig. 2: IPC of two-level schedulers of RFC and software RFC in monolithic and sub-core based architectures normalized to their
baseline

show later in this paper, are rather inefficient or unfeasible in
modern sub-core-based architectures with tensor cores.
Memento overcomes these limitations in the following way.
First, Memento implements the cache inside OCUs instead
of adding a separate RF cache, unlike RFC, software RFC,
and LTRF. Adding the RF cache apart from OCUs has the
overhead of the RF cache itself, routing networks delivering
the traffic into/out of the cache, and pipeline modifications
to integrate the RF cache. Instead, Memento repurposes the
OCUs to operate as both RF cache and OCU to avoid such
overheads. OCUs already have storage space to buffer source
operands of an instruction, but they do not function as a cache.
By turning the OCUs into an RF cache, Memento reuses the
values already stored in the OCU and seamlessly integrates
the RF cache into the pipeline.
Second, Memento time shares the RF cache storage among
warps instead of having a private RF cache per warp, as BOW
does. Having a dedicated RF cache per warp makes easy to
implement compiler optimizations since the content of the
cache is deterministic, as there are no conflicting access from
other warps and GPUs issue instructions in-order. However,
it has a high area and power overhead. Having a private RF
cache, as BOW does, requires as many OCUs as the number
of warps. It means that a GPU with 64 warps per SM and
four sub-cores, similar to A100 [47], [48], requires 16 OCUs
per sub-core. Even ignoring the overhead of the added cache
storage, increasing the number of OCUs from 2 to 16 has a
power overhead of 5.19× [11] in the RF.
Third, Memento captures temporal locality through a fully
associative cache with a very small number of entries, unlike
BOW, which requires many more entries to support modern
tensor core instructions. This is because BOW requires a buffer
to store all sources and destinations of a few instructions
within a sliding window. In that design, the more instructions
in the sliding window or the more source and destinations
per instruction, the larger the buffer must be. Tensor core
instructions have both of these characteristics. They have a
high number of source and destination registers and a relatively
high reuse distance, which requires scaling the sliding window
size significantly to capture locality. In particular, Fig. 1
depicts the reuse distance of register values for Deepbench
[9] and Rodinia [13] compiled to Turing native ISA [46].
Deepbench has a high frequency of tensor core instructions,
65.6% for conv, and shows higher reuse distances. Fig. 1
also shows that more than 40% of reuses in Deepbench have
a distance greater than 10. In addition, in Turing’s native

ISA, tensor core instructions can have up to eight 4B source
and destination registers [57], [60], [70]. Putting this all
together, a buffer to store source and destination registers of
11 tensor core instructions for 32 threads in a warp requires
32 × 11 × 8 × 4B = 11KB. This overhead is avoided by
Memento by using a much smaller number of entries and
relying on more efficient cache management policies guided
by reuse distances.
Fourth, Memento uses a one-level scheduling policy, unlike RFC, software RFC, and LTRF, which use a two-level
scheduler to reduce overhead. RF cache schemes using twolevel schedulers allocate the RF cache space only to a subset
of warps called active set. Only the warps in the active set
can issue instructions in each cycle. The performance of these
two-level schedulers is highly sensitive to the policy that
determines which and how many warps are active. In a modern
architecture with sub-cores, the number of warps per sub-core
is low, and thus, the number of warps in the active set is even
lower and limits the capability to hide short latency stalls.
A two-level scheduler causes unnecessary stalls in the issue
cycle when a warp is ready yet not in the active set. Fig. 2
shows the IPC impact of the two-level schedulers proposed in
RFC and software RFC for two different architectures with 32
warps and an active set of 8 warps per SM. In one architecture,
monolithic, there is only one scheduler issuing one instruction
per cycle common in early GPU architectures such as Tesla
[37]. In another architecture, sub-core, warps are distributed
on four sub-cores, each having one scheduler as it is the case
in modern architectures such as Turing [56]. Each scheduler
manages only 8 warps, 2 of which are in the active set.
The results show a very important drop in performance of
12.9% for software RFC and 9.9% for RFC on average in
the sub-core architecture. Some applications such as hotspot,
suffer a 50% performance loss using software RFC in the
sub-core architecture. Although the monolithic architecture
experiences a small performance drop of 2.1% for RFC and
3.5% for software RFC on average, it is not negligible for some
applications such as nn that suffer a 31.1% IPC drop using
software RFC. In conclusion, previously proposed RF cache
schemes that leverage a two-level scheduler incur in a very
important performance loss, especially in modern architectures
that use sub-cores, which outweighs any potential benefit in
RF energy reduction. On the other hand, Memento not only
does not cause any penalties, but also provides a significant
performance improvement.
To sum up, avoiding the above-mentioned inefficiencies

2

