QUETZAL: Vector Acceleration Framework for
Modern Genome Sequence Analysis Algorithms
Julian Pavon∗† , Ivan Vargas Valdivieso∗† , Carlos Rojas∗† , Cesar Hernandez∗ , Mehmet Aslan§ , Roger Figueras∗ ,
Yichao Yuan¶ , Joël Lindegger‡ , Mohammed Alser‡ , Francesc Moll† , Santiago Marco-Sola† , Oguz Ergin§
Nishil Talati¶ , Onur Mutlu§ , Osman Unsal∗ , Mateo Valero∗† and Adrian Cristal∗
∗ Barcelona Supercomputing Center

† Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

§ TOBB ETÜ University of Economics & Technology

‡ ETH Zurich

¶ University of Michigan

Email: julian.pavon@bsc.es
causes [14], 2) functional regions that are conserved across evolution
among different protein sequences for designing personalized
therapeutic treatments [15], and 3) similarity approximation between
many sequences for finding highly similar sequences or obtaining
phylogenetic trees [16].
Two primary categories of algorithms typically employed in the
analysis of genome sequences are: 1) Sequence alignment and 2)
edit distance approximation. The sequence alignment problem is
formulated as Approximate String Matching (ASM) [17]. ASM is
often solved using Dynamic Programming (DP) algorithms, such
as Smith-Waterman-Gotoh (SWG) and Needleman-Wunsch (NW).
DP-based algorithms are computationally expensive with quadratic
time and space complexities in sequence length. Edit distance
approximation algorithms, such as SneakySnake (SS) [18] and
Shouji [19], approximate the edit distance (number of edits needed
to convert one sequence into the other [20]) that is always less than
or equal to a user-defined threshold.
Analyzing the ever-increasing volumes of sequencing data [21]
poses significant computational challenges, motivating a large body
of research focusing on optimizing genome sequence analysis
applications. These include 1) software/algorithmic optimizations
and 2) hardware optimizations for both sequence alignment [22–46]
and edit distance approximation [18, 19, 36, 47–54].
The majority of software/algorithm proposals fit into one of
two categories. First, multiple heuristic algorithms have been proposed to improve the quadratic execution time of DP algorithms by
pruning the number of operations required by these algorithms [29,
55–58]. However, these approaches do not ensure an optimal solution, jeopardizing the results of genome sequence analysis. Second,
I. INTRODUCTION
a number of works aim to efficiently rearrange the DP computation
The diminishing cost and improving efficiency of modern while ensuring an optimal solution. Recently among them is a family
genome sequencing technologies, in conjunction with the eluci- of promising novel algorithms, called Wavefront Alignment [32,
dation of comprehensive genome sequences for both humans and 34]. The implementation of these improved algorithms brings new
various other species, such as microbes, have inaugurated an era challenges, such as pointer chasing operations, which reduce the
marked by an exponentially expanding array of novel applications memory-level parallelism in general purpose architectures, thus
and scientific discoveries. These include, for example, personalized requiring better and more sophisticated hardware to fully exploit the
medicine [1–7], evolutionary genetics [8–10] and forensics [11– benefits of these algorithms.
13]. One of the fundamental computational steps in these appliIn contrast, existing hardware approaches are subject to three
cations is genome sequence analysis, where genome sequences primary limitations. First, some proposals prescribe a limiting
are compared to each other to infer important genetic information. hardware architecture tailored to a singular sequencing algoThis information includes 1) the number and locations of genomic rithm [47, 59]. Second, some proposals target only one genome
variations in DNA and RNA sequences for identifying disease data type (i.e., DNA/RNA) [44] that lack generality. Third, some
Abstract—Genome sequence analysis is fundamental to medical
breakthroughs such as developing vaccines, enabling genome
editing, and facilitating personalized medicine. The exponentially
expanding sequencing datasets and complexity of sequencing
algorithms necessitate performance enhancements. While the performance of software solutions is constrained by their underlying
hardware platforms, the utility of fixed-function accelerators is
restricted to only certain sequencing algorithms.
This paper presents QUETZAL, the first general-purpose vector
acceleration framework designed for high efficiency and broad
applicability across a diverse set of genomics algorithms. While a
commercial CPU’s vector datapath is a promising candidate
to exploit the data-level parallelism in genomics algorithms,
our analysis finds that its performance is often limited due
to long-latency scatter/gather memory instructions. QUETZAL
introduces a hardware-software co-design comprising an accelerator microarchitecture closely integrated with the CPU’s
vector datapath, alongside novel vector instructions to fully
capitalize on the proposed hardware. QUETZAL integrates a set
of scratchpad-style buffers meticulously designed to minimize
latency associated with scatter/gather instructions during the
retrieval of input genome sequences data. QUETZAL supports
both short and long reads, and different types of sequencing data
formats. A combination of hardware and software techniques
enables QUETZAL to reduce the latency of memory instructions,
perform complex computation using a single instruction, and
transform data representations at runtime, resulting in overall
efficiency gain. QUETZAL significantly accelerates a vectorized
CPU baseline on modern genome sequence analysis algorithms
by 5.7×, while incurring a small area overhead of 1.4% post
place-and-route at the 7nm technology node compared to an HPC
ARM CPU.

© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00050

approaches exhibit the constraint of exclusively processing short
We demonstrate the effectiveness of QUETZAL using a fullinput sequences [44, 59]. Given the ongoing emergence of novel system cycle-accurate simulator and different use cases of approxialgorithms, such as WFA [32, 33] and BiWFA [34, 35], alongside mate string matching in genome sequence analysis (both sequence
the introduction of new sequencing data types, exemplified by HiFi alignment and edit distance approximation). Specifically, we use
from PacBio [60, 61] and Duplex from ONT [62], characterized the state-of-the-art ASM algorithms (WFA, BiWFA, and SS) for
by longer and more accurate sequences, there exists a need for both short and long sequences for evaluation. Our results show that
software developers and hardware architects to devise adaptable, QUETZAL outperforms baseline vectorized CPU implementations
flexible, and scalable systems. These systems should facilitate the by 6.1×, and 5.2×, on average, for read alignment, and edit distance
flexible integration of new sequence analysis algorithms and data approximation, respectively. We implement QUETZAL in RTL
without necessitating the reconstruction of the accelerator. We pose using a 7nm technology node; the place-and-route results reveal that
the following question: how can we design an architecture that our design consumes a small 746µW power and 0.097mm2 area (a
not only provides improved efficiency and performance for genome small overhead of 1.4% compared to a Fujitsu A64FX processor).
sequence analysis, but is also programmable to accommodate a
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
broad spectrum of emerging genomics algorithms and data?
• A detailed analysis of challenges involved in accelerating
The motivation for enhanced performance with programmabilgenome sequence analysis algorithms using a CPU vector
ity finds robust validation within the industrial context as well.
datapath.
NVIDIA’s recent integration of Dynamic Programming X (DPX)
• Design of a cost-effective vector accelerator architecture tightly
instructions [63] stands out as a noteworthy instance aimed at
coupled with a commodity CPU’s vector datapath.
bolstering GPU efficiency across various domains such as genomics,
• Introduction of vector instructions for unleashing the complete
proteomics, and robot path planning. This adoption embodies
potential of our vector accelerator design.
a design philosophy where developers can accelerate existing
• QUETZAL: a programmable vector framework to accelerate
algorithms and innovate new ones by leveraging DPX instructions,
a wide range of genome sequence analysis algorithms that
which are ISA extensions to optimize various application domains,
offers an average speedup of 5.7× compared to a baseline
thereby capitalizing on the same hardware changes across many
CPU architecture with a small 1.4% area overhead.
domains. Such design philosophy has similarly been used to
accelerate workloads in other application domains on GPUs (e.g.,
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
tensor programs), using for example tensor cores and tensor memory
This section provides an overview of classical and modern
access units [64]. This paper follows a similar approach to offer
genome
sequence analysis algorithms. Subsequently, we analyze
a high-performance, programmable solution for a wide range of
the
shortcomings
of modern genome sequence analysis algorithms
genome sequence analysis workloads.
to
fully
exploit
the
performance and energy benefits of vector
Modern ASM algorithms, such as WFA and BiWFA, exhibit
architectures.
notable levels of Data Level Parallelism (DLP), as large amounts of
data undergo identical operations. The use of vector architectures
A. Classical DP sequence alignment algorithms
in modern CPUs, characterized by Single Instruction Multiple Data
Sequence alignment is a fundamental method used in genomics to
(SIMD) execution [65], is a well-known technique for harnessing
the available DLP in applications. Vector architectures offer a compare and identify similarities between two biological sequences,
versatile framework, making them adaptable to a wide range of such as DNA, RNA, or protein sequences. The goal is to assess
ASM algorithms. However, these algorithms pose new challenges the similarity between two sequences by introducing the minimum
to efficient execution on vector architectures. Specifically, these necessary gaps (insertions and deletions) and mismatches to match
algorithms employ memory-indexed instructions, e.g., scatter/gather, (or align) one sequence with the other. Fig. 1.a shows an example of
which are costly and entail considerable latency for retrieving and the Needleman-Wunsch (NW) table [22] (a classic and extensively
employed DP approach) on the sequence pair <ACAG, AAGT>.
storing intermediate data [32, 36].
This paper presents QUETZAL, the first universal vector accelIn this example, each entry represents the number of edits
eration framework for modern ASM algorithms using hardware- required to align the prefixes of the two strings up to the current
software co-design. The primary design goal of QUETZAL is to row and column. A new entry (marked in blue in Fig. 1.a) is
strike a balance between efficiency and versatility. The proposed computed through simple arithmetic from their west, north-west, and
design supports both short and long sequences, and different data north neighbors (marked in green and red in Fig. 1.a). Traceback
encoding schemes to efficiently accommodate various alphabets of determines the optimal alignment by re-tracing the origin of the
RNA, DNA, and protein data. In particular, QUETZAL combines value in the southeast corner. For example, the origin of the bluea vector accelerator architecture tightly coupled with the general- marked cell is marked in green in Fig. 1.a, and traceback would
purpose CPU’s pipeline, and supports novel vector instructions to record it as an insertion. From there, traceback would determine
fully unlock the potential of the proposed hardware. QUETZAL the origin of the green-marked cell, and so on, until it reaches the
accelerator features a pair of scratchpad-style buffers connected to north-west corner. The Needleman-Wunsch algorithm has been the
the Vector Processing Unit (VPU) in the core’s datapath. QUETZAL cornerstone for many subsequent algorithms and tools [22, 46]. The
instructions use these buffers to replace the memory-indexed Needleman-Wunsch algorithm provides an optimal solution as it
instructions with direct data requests to the VPU.
calculates the complete DP table regardless of the sequence length.

2

