arXiv:2404.19712v2 [quant-ph] 28 Jun 2024

QuTracer: Mitigating Quantum Gate and
Measurement Errors by Tracing Subsets of Qubits
Peiyi Li∗

Ji Liu∗

Alvin Gonzales

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, USA
pli11@ncsu.edu

Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, USA
ji.liu@anl.gov

Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, USA
agonzales@anl.gov

Zain Hamid Saleem

Huiyang Zhou

Paul Hovland

Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, USA
zsaleem@anl.gov

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, USA
hzhou@ncsu.edu

Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, USA
hovland@mcs.anl.gov

Virtual Distillation [22], [26], Symmetry Verification [7], [9],
[29], [30], [43], Pauli Check Sandwiching (PCS) [14], [19],
[44], and measurement subsetting [11], [13].
Previous work in measurement subsetting [11], [13] made
the observation that measuring a subset of qubits leads to
lower measurement errors than measuring all the qubits by
reducing the measurement crosstalk. The more accurate local
distributions from subset measurements can then be used
to improve the measurement results of all the qubits, i.e.,
the global distribution. Inspired by measurement subsetting,
we propose the following hypothesis: if we can mitigate
the noise of a subset of qubits throughout the entire circuit
execution and achieve high-fidelity results for these subsets
of qubits, can we significantly improve the overall fidelity?
In this paper, we develop a novel qubit subsetting framework,
QuTracer, to validate our hypothesis. QuTracer continuously
tracks the state of qubit subsets throughout the computational
process and mitigates errors along the way. The high-fidelity
local distributions can be obtained and used to refine the
noisy global distribution. Compared to the previous work on
measurement subsetting, QuTracer effectively mitigates both
gate and measurement errors. Mitigating noise in a subset of
qubits is also much more effective and less costly than directly
mitigating the noise on all the qubits.
QuTracer consists of multiple novel ideas. First, we repurpose the circuit cutting technique to track the state of qubit
subsets, analogous to watchpoints during program execution.
Second, we propose qubit subsetting Pauli check (QSPC) to
mitigate the errors on qubit subsets. Our proposed implementation of QSPC has low circuit cost. For example, adding singlequbit subset Pauli checks only requires insertion of singlequbit gates. Third, we propose a multi-layer qubit subsetting
approach designed to mitigate errors in circuits requiring
multiple layers of Pauli checks. Fourth, we propose a series
of novel optimizations specifically tailored for the process
of qubit subsetting, offering improvements in efficiency and
accuracy.
Our noisy simulator and real-device experimental results
confirm the effectiveness of our proposed QuTracer framework.

Abstract—Quantum error mitigation plays a crucial role in
the current noisy-intermediate-scale-quantum (NISQ) era. As we
advance towards achieving a practical quantum advantage in
the near term, error mitigation emerges as an indispensable
component. One notable prior work, Jigsaw, demonstrates that
measurement crosstalk errors can be effectively mitigated by
measuring subsets of qubits. Jigsaw operates by running multiple
copies of the original circuit, each time measuring only a subset
of qubits. The localized distributions yielded from measurement
subsetting suffer from less crosstalk and are then used to
update the global distribution, thereby achieving improved output
fidelity.
Inspired by the idea of measurement subsetting, we propose
QuTracer, a framework designed to mitigate both gate and
measurement errors in subsets of qubits by tracing the states
of qubit subsets throughout the computational process. In order
to achieve this goal, we introduce a technique, qubit subsetting
Pauli checks (QSPC), which utilizes circuit cutting and Pauli
Check Sandwiching (PCS) to trace the qubit subsets distribution
to mitigate errors. The QuTracer framework can be applied to
various algorithms including, but not limited to, VQE, QAOA,
quantum arithmetic circuits, QPE, and Hamiltonian simulations.
In our experiments, we perform both noisy simulations and real
device experiments to demonstrate that QuTracer is scalable and
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum computing is rapidly emerging as a transformative
technology, offering great potential for chemistry simulations [27], combinatorial optimization [16], machine learning [40], and other domains [8]. Ideal quantum computers
with fully fault-tolerant error correction codes [1], [25] remain
distant, and we currently find ourselves in the Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) era [37], characterized by quantum
computers comprising of tens to thousands of noisy qubits and
limited connectivity.
In the NISQ era, quantum error mitigation has emerged
as a promising strategy to deal with errors arising during
quantum computation. Instead of fully correcting the errors,
we may mitigate these errors to an acceptable level. Various
approaches have been proposed to this end, including Zero
Noise Extrapolation [18], [42], Clifford Data Regression [10],
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

1

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce QuTracer, a qubit subsetting framework that
monitors the distribution of a subset of qubits to mitigate
errors. It mitigates both gate errors and measurement
crosstalk errors, thereby surpassing the capability of
measurement subsetting.
• We repurpose circuit cutting to track the quantum states
during the circuit execution. This is analogous to enabling
watchpoints when debugging classical programs.
• We propose qubit subsetting Pauli Checks (QSPC) to
mitigate the errors on qubit subsets. QSPC has a lower
cost than the existing Pauli check error detection schemes.
• We propose and incorporate multiple optimizations for
qubit subsetting. These optimizations include state preparation reduction, localized gate simulation, gate bypassing, state traceback, false dependency removal, and qubit
remapping.
• We demonstrate the scalability and effectiveness of our
approach through rigorous experimentation. Our experimental results on both noisy simulators and real quantum
devices show that QuTracer significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art approaches.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review
related works and discuss the motivation of qubit subsetting.
In Section III, we use the inverse quantum Fourier transform
circuit as an example to illustrate the QuTracer framework.
In Section IV, we present the theory and the design of
qubit subsetting Pauli checks. In Section V, we present the
design of the QuTracer framework and discuss the relevant
optimizations. In Section VI, we provide the experimental
setup. In Section VII, we discuss both the noisy simulation
and the real-device results. Finally, Section IX concludes the
paper.

measurement subsetting is limited for circuits with a high
circuit depth, leading to a high gate error rate. Therefore,
a subsetting technique that can also effectively mitigate gate
errors is desired.
B. Circuit Cutting
Quantum circuit cutting decomposes a payload circuit into
smaller fragments such that they can run on smaller quantum
devices [3], [4], [34], [35]. Circuit cutting works by measuring
a complete basis set on the left side of the cut and preparing
the corresponding states on the right side of the cut. To see
how this can be done when cutting one qubit, we can fragment
an arbitrary quantum state ρ as
1 X
M ⊗ trj (Mj ρ),
(1)
ρ=
2
M ∈B

where B represents the basis set of 2 × 2 Pauli matrices, trj is
the partial trace over qubit j, and Mj represents an operator
that acts with Pauli operator M on qubit j and acts with
identity I on other qubits. By expanding M in its spectral
decomposition, we can decompose ρ into a sum of channels
that contains measurements M on qubit j followed by the
preparation of quantum states which are the eigenstates of M .
When cutting multiple qubits, the number of Pauli basis scales
exponentially O(4n ) with the number of the cutting qubits n.
Measuring the probability distribution of qubits at the cut
provides complete information about the quantum state at that
position. In conventional circuit cutting, this state information
is used to reconstruct the state after the circuit cutting. However, we make a key observation that the state information at
the cut can also be leveraged to monitor the execution of the
program and to facilitate error mitigation.
Takeaway: Circuit cutting, rather than being solely used for
dividing a circuit into multiple subcircuits, can be repurposed
to monitor the quantum states throughout the execution of a
circuit.

II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
A. Measurement Error Mitigation via Measurement Subsetting

|0⟩

Measurement subsetting, i.e., the JigSaw protocol, aims to
reduce the effects of measurement errors [13]. The protocol
splits the experiment shots into a set containing all the end
measurements and a set containing only partial measurements.
The circuits with partial measurements are equivalent to the
complete circuit, except that some of the measurement operators at the end are removed. The circuit with all measurements
generates a noisy global distribution. The partial measurement
circuits generate local distributions that have high local fidelities due to the reduced measurement errors. Then, the local
distributions refine the global distribution through a Bayesian
recombination method that uses local information to update the
global distribution. VarSaw is an improved version of JigSaw
intended for variational quantum algorithms (VQA) [11]. It
recognizes that various time and spatial redundancies exist in
measurement subsetting for VQA circuits. By eliminating such
redundancy, VarSaw can achieve better efficiency.
Takeaway: While Jigsaw and Varsaw target measurement
errors, gate errors remain unmitigated. The effectiveness of

H

ρ

|0⟩

ρ

H

CL

U

ε

ρout

CR

H

H

U

†
CR

ε

CR

ρout

Fig. 1: General idea of Pauli Check Sandwiching (PCS). ε is the
noise map due to U . The two circuits are equivalent as a result of
Eq. (3), and the sandwiched ε can be seen as a transformed noise
map. The gates that prepare the input state ρ are not shown.

2

