On Error Correction for Nonvolatile
Processing-In-Memory
Hüsrev Cılasun, Salonik Resch, Zamshed I. Chowdhury, Masoud Zabihi,
Yang Lv, Brandon Zink, Jian-Ping Wang, Sachin S. Sapatnekar, Ulya R. Karpuzcu

arXiv:2207.13261v2 [cs.ET] 29 Apr 2024

University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{cilas001, resc0059, chowh005, zabih003, lvxxx057, zinkx030, jpwang, sachin, ukarpuzc}@umn.edu

Abstract—Processing in memory (PiM) represents a promising
computing paradigm to enhance performance of numerous dataintensive applications. Variants performing computing directly
in emerging nonvolatile memories can deliver very high energy
efficiency. PiM architectures directly inherit the vulnerabilities
of the underlying memory substrates, but they also are subject
to errors due to the computation in place. Numerous wellestablished error correcting codes (ECC) for memory exist, and
are also considered in the PiM context, however, they typically
ignore errors that occur throughout computation. In this paper
we revisit the error correction design space for nonvolatile
PiM, considering both storage/memory and computation-induced
errors, surveying several self-checking and homomorphic approaches. We propose several solutions and analyze their complex
performance-area-coverage trade-off, using three representative
nonvolatile PiM technologies. All of these solutions guarantee
single error correction for both, bulk bitwise computations and
ordinary memory/storage errors.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Processing in memory (PiM) is a promising computing
paradigm for data-intensive applications. The core idea is
performing logic operations directly within the memory system to minimize, if not eliminate, lengthy and power hungry
data transfers. PiM features a rich design space spanned
by (i) the underlying memory technology, (ii) where in the
memory hierarchy the computation takes place, and (iii)
how logic operations are performed. More traditional PiM
architectures based on SRAM [2], DRAM [50], STT-MRAM
or ReRAM [39] perform computation at the memory array
periphery by exploiting sense amplifiers or by using dedicated
logic blocks. In this case, the result of each logic operation
has to be written back to the corresponding memory element.
Computing directly within the memory arrays is also possible.
This time, memory elements get seamlessly updated with
the results of computation, in-situ, using different memory
technologies such as DRAM [21], [60], ReRAM [30], [33],
STT-MRAM [56] or SOT/SHE-MRAM [57]. In this paper
we target an especially promising class of PiM for energy
efficiency, which can perform universal Boolean computation
directly in nonvolatile memory (NVM) [30], [33], [48].
By construction, PiM architectures directly inherit the reliability characteristics of the underlying memory substrates,
but they are also vulnerable to errors due to computation.
Unfortunately, error detection and correction for PiM is
This work was in part supported by Cisco fellowships.

not well-characterized. Traditional memory systems typically
utilize error correcting codes (ECC) to detect and correct
storage/memory-induced errors, which are not designed to
protect dynamically changing data (i.e., against computationinduced errors which PiM implies). Adapting conventional
fault tolerance techniques to protect computation is also possible, but only if PiM logic blocks in charge of computation
and the memory arrays represent separate entities, which is
not always the case. Targeted PiM architectures in this paper
fuse logic and memory, where each memory cell can directly
act as an input or as an output to a Boolean operation, and
where computation strictly happens within the array. In this
case, neither classical ECCs for storage/memory, nor classical
fault tolerance techniques for computation directly apply and
represent a comprehensive solution. We focus on this more
challenging problem.
Numerous well-established ECCs for memory [8], including
NVM [45], exist. A few studies consider ECCs in the PiM
context: One example extends MAGIC based processing in (resistive) memory to support two dimensional parity bits, which
enables error detection and correction in idle data only, excluding computation-induced errors [32], [36]. Another example
covers Triple-Modular Redundancy (TMR) [37] for MAGIC
based PiM in ReRAM. Redundancy here comes in two flavors:
time and space. TMR (or generalized N-modular redundancy)
is trivially simple and covers computation-induced errors, but
can incur a significant time and/or space overhead.
In this paper we make the distinction between conventional
memory errors, that PiM systems inherit from the underlying memory, and logic errors, that stem from computing in
memory. Logic errors do not necessarily always manifest
themselves as memory errors, especially when computing
continuously in memory without any interruption. In this case,
corruptions due to logic errors can easily propagate before
periodic ECC checks to catch conventional memory errors
kick in. Accordingly, we revisit the error correction design
space for nonvolatile PiM, considering both memory and logic
errors. To this end, we explore classical self-checking and homomorphic approaches, and introduce several solutions which
can guarantee single error correction for three representative
nonvolatile PiM technologies supporting in-array computing
semantics.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II covers PiM and
fault tolerance basics; Section III, ECC design space for PiM;

Section IV, practical error correction approaches for PiM;
Sections V and VI, the evaluation; Section VII, the related
work; and Section VIII, a summary of our findings.

All of the systems we cover can support many different
universal Boolean gates or gate sets besides NOR. In the
following, we will use NOR based bitwise logic without loss of
generality. Due to this thresholding principle in implementing
logic operations, not all logic functions can be performed in a
single step. An example is XOR which, as depicted in Table I,
can take 3 steps (NOR, CP, and the thresholding gate THR
applied in a sequence). in1 and in2 here represent the inputs;
s1 , the output of NOR; s2 , a copy of the NOR output; and
out, the actual output of XOR, which is the output of the 4input thresholding gate THR. THR takes in1 , in2 , s1 , and
s2 as inputs. The preset for THR output is logic 0, which
only switches to 1 if three or more of its inputs are 0. All of
the the PiM technologies we consider support 2-output NOR
gates, NOR22 , which makes finishing the NOR and CP gates
from Table I in one step possible, rendering a 2-step XOR
function (2-output NOR and THR performed in a sequence). In
the Appendix, we provide a detailed electrical characterization
for 2-output gate operation.

II. BACKGROUND
A. Nonvolatile PiM Basics
Without loss of generality, in this paper we evaluate nonvolatile (resistive) PiM architectures which strictly perform
logic operations within the memory array. Computing directly
in the arrays using memory cells already challenges ECC
design due to faster and more frequent data updates in place.
This problem becomes especially acute for resistive PiM
architectures capable of performing very large numbers of bulk
bitwise operations in parallel, energy efficiently. In this case,
only a minimum overhead ECC solution can help.
Resistive memory cells encode two distinct levels of device
resistance, low (Rlow ) and high (Rhigh ), respectively, to logic
values (0 and 1, in STT and SOT/SHE MRAM; 1 and 0, in
ReRAM). Fig.1 covers three representative examples based
on ReRAM (a), STT-MRAM (b), and SOT/SHE-MRAM (c),
which facilitate computation directly within the memory arrays
using resistive memory cells. In each case, memory functions
(i.e., reads and writes) closely follow the operation semantics
of the underlying memory technology. For reads, this translates
into passing a small current through the memory device (by
appropriately biasing the control lines), which gets modulated
by the resistance (hence, logic state) of the device, and which
in turn is captured by sense amplifiers to extract the actual
logic state. For writes in ReRAM, applying a voltage at
memory device’s on-(off-)threshold changes the resistance to
low(high)/1(0). Writes in STT- or SOT/SHE-MRAM, on the
other hand, have a single current threshold and the direction
of the current through the memory device determines the
final state. SOT/SHE-MRAM retains most of the operation
principles of STT-MRAM except that each memory device
features a Spin-Orbit-Torque (SOT) or Spin-Hall Effect (SHE)
channel to enhance the energy efficiency of writes.
For logic operations, all three designs can form universal
Boolean gates within the array where each memory cell can act
as an input or as an output. Electrically, each gate corresponds
to a resistive network as shown in Fig.1(d). First the designated
output cell is preset to a known value. Then, by appropriately
biasing the control lines, the network in Fig.1(d) is formed.
Finally, a gate specific voltage (Vbias ) is applied across the
network, to enforce switching of the output cell according to
the underlying truth table, as a function of the logic states of
the input cells.
As an example, the output preset value for a NOR gate
in MRAM is logic 0. Under any Vbias the combined current through the input cells that passes through the output
cell monotonically decreases with increasing input resistance
levels. Therefore it is possible to determine a NOR specific
Vbias = VNOR such that the output cell switches –the combined
current through the input cells is above the critical current,
IC , for switching the output cell– only if both input cells
are in Rlow state. In ReRAM, a similar procedure applies.

in1
0
0
1
1

in2
0
1
0
1

s1 =
NOR(in1 , in2 )
1
0
0
0

s2 =
CP(s1 )
1
0
0
0

out =
THR(in1 , in2 , s1 , s1 )
0
1
1
0

TABLE I: 3-step XOR [14].
All three PiM technologies support three different levels of
parallelism: (1) Partition-level parallelism [38] where each row
can be divided into several partitions using transistors, such
that multiple logic operations can be performed in each row;
(2) Row-level parallelism, where each row can perform the
same Boolean gate simultaneously; (3) Array-level parallelism
where each memory array can perform computational tasks in
parallel.
B. Application Mapping
A generic PiM compiler flow incorporates three major steps
as sketched in [48]:
1) Intermediate code generation involves identifying (multibit) PiM operations as well as the data layout for the input,
output, and scratch spaces, i.e., cells where the inputs and
the outputs reside and where the intermediate gate operations
take place, respectively.
2) Gate-level opcode generation translates multi-bit operations from 1) into actual Boolean logic gates from the PiM
library. HDL synthesis tools can be adopted for this level of
translation. Also possible is taking advantage of emerging
homomorphic computing tools, where software transpilers
can map arbitrary software to Boolean gates [7], [9], [22],
[23], [34].
3) Binary instruction translation represents the last step,
where gate-level opcodes get mapped to their binary equivalents to drive voltages. This mapping is specific to the array
architecture and involves the bias voltages for BSLs/WLs
from Fig.1.

2

