Counter-light Memory Encryption
Xin Wang∗ , Jagadish Kotra† , Alex Jones‡ , Wenjie Xiong∗ , Xun Jian∗
∗ Virginia Tech

† AMD

‡ University of Pittsburgh

xinw@vt.edu, jagadish.kotra@amd.com, akjones@pitt.edu, wenjiex@vt.edu, xunj@vt.edu

as counterless encryption. Examples include SGX2 [43], TME
[36], MKTME [35], SME [46] [4], SEV [6], SEV-SNP [7].
Without counters, they only provide encryption and integrity
check, but do not protect against physical replay attack; they
only protect against software replay attacks [7] [35]. Cloud
data centers like Microsoft Azure, AWS, and Google cloud
are deploying counterless encryption widely in their cloud
servers. For example, on AWS, users can launch an Amazon
EC2 instance with SEV turned on [3].
Problem: Counterless encryption, however, still incurs a
costly performance overhead due to its slow cipher calculation
(i.e., AES [20]) for decrypting data; the cipher calculation
slows down every LLC (last-level cache) read miss due to
starting after the arrival of data, which are the direct inputs
to the cipher calculations. While prefetching can effectively
hide this latency overhead for regular workloads, it cannot
for irregular workloads – the important workloads that motivated the move from counter mode encryption to counterless
encryption. On an Intel Silver 4314 CPU, we find turning on
TME, which uses counterless encryption, slows down irregular
workloads by 9%, on average (see Section III).
Observation: We observe while counter mode encryption
accesses memory slower than counterless encryption, it calculates cipher faster. Its cipher calculations can often complete
before data arrive because they take counters as input, instead
of data, and counters fit on-chip much better than data. While
counter blocks suffer frequent cache misses under irregular
workloads, the AES results of counter values can still be
effectively memoized [74]; a single counter value can be
simultaneously used by many (e.g., millions of) data blocks,
allowing the counter values needed by many (e.g., > 90% of)
LLC read misses to hit in a small memoization table [74].
When a counter arrives from DRAM, fetching the memoized
AES result of the counter’s value bypasses the long latency of
recalculating the AES result from scratch.
Key Idea: To improve performance over counterless
encryption, we propose combining aspects of counter mode
encryption with counterless encryption to achieve the best of
both world in performance – the efficient memory accesses of
counterless encryption and fast cipher calculations of counter
mode encryption. Some current systems (e.g., the one we evaluated in Section III) already contain both modes of memory
encryption to give users multiple memory security options;
under the counterless encryption security option, utilizing parts
of the unused counter mode encryption to boost performance
also improves the utilization of valuable on-chip resources.
We refer to our proposed memory encryption combining

Abstract—Unlike the well-known counter mode memory encryption (e.g., SGX1), more recent memory encryption (e.g.,
SGX2, SEV) has no counters. Without accessing any counters,
such counterless memory encryption improves performance over
counter mode encryption and gains wide adoption as a result.
Counterless encryption, however, still incurs a costly performance overhead. Under counterless encryption, the cipher
calculations take data as their direct inputs. As such, the ciphers
for decrypting data can only be calculated sequentially after the
missing data arrive from memory; this requires every last-level
cache miss to stall on the cipher calculations after the needed
data arrive from memory. Our real-system measurements find
counterless encryption can slow down irregular workloads by
9%, on average.
We observe while counter mode encryption incurs costly memory access overhead, its cipher calculations can often complete
before data arrive because they take counters as input, instead
of data, and counters can fit on-chip much better than data. As
such, we explore how to combine both modes of encryption to
achieve the best of both worlds – the efficient memory accesses
of counterless encryption and fast cipher calculations of counter
mode encryption. For irregular workloads, our proposed memory encryption – Counter-light Encryption – achieves 98% the
average performance of no memory encryption. When memory
bandwidth is starved, Counter-light Encryption is slower than
counterless encryption by only 1.4% in the worst case.

I. I NTRODUCTION
While many companies are moving to cloud to reduce
computing cost, cloud computing raises new security and trust
concerns as companies lose control over physical accesses to
the servers running their applications. To protect the confidentiality of sensitive data, the CPU-side memory controller (MC)
encrypts memory values to protect data from attackers.
Older memory encryption (e.g., SGX1 [28]) provides not
only confidentiality, but also protection against physical replay
attacks (i.e., reverting memory blocks to older values via
physical access to memory). Physical replay protection is
achieved by encrypting each block with a counter that increases whenever writing the block to memory and protecting
each counter with a tree of counters called the integrity tree.
The counters, however, incur both costly memory bandwidth
and capacity overheads. Prior Split Counters designs [62]
[70] [67] effectively reduce the memory capacity overhead
down to just 1%; however, the costly bandwidth overhead
to access the counters still remains. While caching counters
can practically eliminate the bandwidth overhead for regular
workloads, irregular workloads suffer from high counter cache
miss rates and, thus, costly memory bandwidth overheads.
Mainstream memory encryption today eliminates all counter
accesses by eliminating counters all together. We refer to this

1

LLC Read Miss

LLC Writeback

Protects Against

Memory Overhead

Counterless

No overhead accesses;
Always calculate cipher after data arrives.

No overhead accesses.

Physical (or software) probing and nonreplay-based tampering.

No memory overhead.

Counter-light
(Our work)

No overhead accesses;
Calculate cipher after data arrives only if
counter misses in AES memoization table.

Overhead accesses only in
epochs with spare bandwidth.

Same as counterless; also faces the same
consequences under replay attacks.

Same as counter mode.

Counter mode

Always access counters;
Calculate cipher after data arrives only if
counter misses in AES memoization table.

Always access counters.

Physical (or software) probing and all
tampering including replay.

1.6% of memory, assuming
split counters design.

Fig. 1: Comparing counterless, Counter-light, and counter mode encryption. Counter-light Encryption achieves the best of both worlds in performance.

both modes as Counter-light Encryption. It encodes each data
block’s current encryption mode and counter value (if any) into
the block’s chipkill-correct ECC. During each LLC writeback,
encoding the data block’s encryption mode in the block’s
ECC allows Counter-light Encryption to dynamically decide
and record the data block’s new encryption mode without
needing any overhead access to record the encryption mode
somewhere else in memory; as such, the blocks being written
can seamlessly switch to counterless encryption for free (i.e.,
no bandwidth overhead involved) to turn off all bandwidth
overheads during fine-grained (e.g., 100us) epochs with high
memory bandwidth utilization (i.e., when bandwidth overhead
is the most harmful). For each LLC read miss, Counter-light
Encryption decodes the arriving data block’s encryption mode
and counter value (if any) from the block’s ECC to decrypt the
arriving data mostly using the fast counter mode decryption
without any overhead access to memory to fetch counters like
counterless encryption.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We explore and address the performance overhead of
counterless memory encryption.
• We explore how to combine aspects of counter mode
encryption with counterless encryption to improve performance over counterless encryption alone. Our proposed
Counter-light Encryption achieves the best of both worlds
- the fast memory accesses of counterless encryption and
fast cipher calculations of counter mode (see Figure 1).
• Our evaluation shows Counter-light Encryption allows
irregular workloads to retain 98% of their average performance over no encryption. Under high memory bandwidth utilization, Counter-light Encryption is only 1.4%
slower than counterless encryption in the worst case.

take different inputs. Encryption modes like AES-XTS uses
data values and addresses as the inputs to the AES block
cipher calculation. AES-CTR uses counters and addresses (but
not data) as inputs.
A. Counterless Memory Encryption
Many flavors of counterless memory encryption are being
used today. Total Memory Encryption (TME) [36] and Secure
Memory Encryption (SME) [4] [46] perform system-level
encryption to encrypt the entire memory system using one key.
Memory Encryption-Multi-Key (TME-MK) [35] and Secure
Encrypted Virtualization (SEV) [46] [45] [7] perform per-VM
encryption to encrypt different VMs using different keys.
Intel SGX2 [23], Intel TME [36] and Intel TME-MK [35]
use AES-XTS [56]. AES-XTS is also used [5] by AMD SME
[4] and AMD SEV (+ES/SNP) [53] [46] [22]. AES-XTS uses
data values and address to calculate AES (see Figure 2a).
Tweak(Address)
Tweak(Address)
Key1
Key1

Address
Address

AES
AES

Key
Key

j

𝛼 𝛼j

CPU
CPU

AES
AES
OTP
OTP

CPU
CPU

Plaintext
Plaintext

Plaintext
Plaintext
Key2
Key2

Counter+1
Counter+1

AES
AES

Memory
Memory

Ciphertext
Ciphertext

(a) Counterless.

Ciphertext
Ciphertext

Counter
Counter

Memory
Memory

(b) Counter mode.

Fig. 2: (a) Counterless encryption. For each 16B word, it performs two
AES calculations – an address-only AES and a data-dependent AES.
’Tweak(Address)’ is a nonnegative tweak value assigned to each 64B block;
while α is a constant across different blocks, j is the sequence number of
the 16B word in the data block. (b) Counter mode encryption. For each 16B
word, it performs a single AES calculation using both counter and data. The
‘Address’ is for a 16B word, while the ‘Counter’ is for a 64B memory block.

Threat Model and Protection: Counterless encryption
is designed for a threat model where attackers have physical
access to victim systems and, thus, can snoop and tamper with
the data sent over the CPU-memory bus. Malicious personnel
with physical access to Cloud servers (e.g., disgruntled Cloud
employees) can tamper with the memory values of applications
migrated to Cloud. An attacker can use one of the many existing commercial off-the-shelf memory bus probes, intended
for system-level integration test and debugging, to probe or
even modify values transmitted over the memory bus.
Counterless encryption protects against malicious probing
of memory values on the memory bus because it encrypts

II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
To enforce the confidentiality of memory in cloud, server
CPUs encrypt memory blocks before writing them to memory
and decrypt them after reading them from memory. The
most time-consuming part of encryption and decryption is
cryptography calculation.
The Advance Encryption Standard [20] (AES) is the most
common cryptography algorithm used by memory encryption.
AES has a fixed size of 128 bits for both input plaintext
and output ciphertext. AES encryption has different encryption
modes [66] (e.g., CTR, XTS, GCM, CFB, ECB, CBC), which

2

