PID-Comm: A Fast and Flexible
Collective Communication Framework for
Commodity Processing-in-DIMM Devices
Si Ung Noh§ ,1 , Junguk Hong§ ,1 , Chaemin Lim† , Seongyeon Park§ , Jeehyun Kim† ,
Hanjun Kim‡ , Youngsok Kim† ,¶ and Jinho Lee§ ,¶
§ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

arXiv:2404.08871v1 [cs.DC] 13 Apr 2024

† Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
‡ School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

{siung98, junguk16}@snu.ac.kr, cmlim@yonsei.ac.kr, syeonp@snu.ac.kr, jeehyun990@yonsei.ac.kr,
{hanjun, youngsok}@yonsei.ac.kr, leejinho@snu.ac.kr

memory-intensive applications can be greatly accelerated on
real systems [1], [28], [29], [63], [69]. PIM-enabled DIMMs
represent one form of PIM, realized by associating in-DIMM
processing elements (PE) to each of their memory banks.
Unfortunately, the effectiveness of PIM-enabled DIMMs
still remains highly limited despite achieving large performance improvements with highly parallel applications. One
important limitation of the commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs is
the huge overhead of inter-PE communication. From the lack
of direct inter-PE paths in the modern DRAM architecture, the
host CPU becomes the medium for transferring data between
PEs [4], [29], incurring large performance overheads upon
inter-PE communication. Some approaches attempt to utilize
off-chip channels for different purposes [90], or even dedicated
links [16], [105]. However, such support is difficult to be
realized in the near future due to strict timing, chip area, and
power constraints imposed on DIMMs [37].
The current methods for inter-PE communication are not
only slow but also lack an adequate abstraction model. This
not only poses a great burden to the programmers but also
leads to low achievable throughput for communications. These
issues greatly limit the benefits of PIM-enabled DIMMs and
have made prior studies mainly focus on accelerating highly
parallel applications with little to no inter-PE communications.
Some approaches addressed these inter-PE communication
issues [11], [30], [63], but they are either limited in flexibility and performance [11] or confined to application-specific
workarounds [30], [63]. Therefore, to fully exploit the high
potential of PIM-enabled DIMMs, there is a clear need for
a fast and flexible inter-PE communication framework that
supports diverse and complex communication patterns and
implementations tailored for the PIM-enabled DIMMs.
In such circumstances, we present PID-Comm, a collective
communication framework as a promising solution for fast
and flexible inter-PE collective communication on commodity
PIM-enabled DIMMs. PID-Comm abstracts the PEs as a
user-defined multi-dimensional virtual hypercube, and maps
them to the hierarchy of the DRAM architecture. Using the

Abstract—Recent dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs) are
starting to support processing-in-memory (PIM) by associating
their memory banks with processing elements (PEs), allowing
applications to overcome the data movement bottleneck by
offloading memory-intensive operations to the PEs. Many highly
parallel applications have been shown to benefit from these PIMenabled DIMMs, but further speedup is often limited by the
huge overhead of inter-PE collective communication. This mainly
comes from the slow CPU-mediated inter-PE communication
methods which incurs significant performance overheads, making it difficult for PIM-enabled DIMMs to accelerate a wider
range of applications. Prior studies have tried to alleviate the
communication bottleneck, but they lack enough flexibility and
performance to be used for a wide range of applications.
In this paper, we present PID-Comm, a fast and flexible
inter-PE collective communication framework for commodity
PIM-enabled DIMMs. The key idea of PID-Comm is to abstract the PEs as a multi-dimensional hypercube and allow
multiple instances of inter-PE collective communication between
the PEs belonging to certain dimensions of the hypercube.
Leveraging this abstraction, PID-Comm first defines eight interPE collective communication patterns that allow applications to
easily express their complex communication patterns. Then, PIDComm provides high-performance implementations of the interPE collective communication patterns optimized for the DIMMs.
Our evaluation using 16 UPMEM DIMMs and representative
parallel algorithms shows that PID-Comm greatly improves the
performance by up to 5.19× compared to the existing inter-PE
communication implementations. The implementation of PIDComm is available at https://github.com/AIS-SNU/PID-Comm.
Index Terms—processing-in-memory, accelerator, DRAM, collective communication

I. I NTRODUCTION
Processing-in-memory (PIM) has emerged as a promising
solution to overcome the data movement bottleneck caused
by frequent memory accesses of memory-intensive applications [2], [7], [22]. With the introduction of commodity
dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs) supporting PIM (e.g.,
UPMEM DIMMs [21]), recent studies have shown that various
1 Co-first authors
¶ Co-corresponding authors

1

Rank N
Rank 0

Input

PE 00
Bank Chip

Entangled
Group
0
1
7

PE 0

PE 1

Mem.

PE 1

SPad

Bank 0
0 8

Bank

Output

Chip 1
Host

D.T.
56

PE 8
PE 56

64B Sequential Data

8B

Bank

8

8

PE 57

(a) Baseline Design

Bank 7
7 15

8
8

PE 9

8

8

Chip
PE7 0

A0 B0 C0 D0

A1 B1 C1 D1

A2 B2 C2 D2

A3 B3 C3 D3

X0

X1

X2

X3

ΣA

ΣB

ΣC

ΣD

X0 X1 X2 X3

X0 X1 X2 X3

X0 X1 X2 X3

X0 X1 X2 X3

A0 B0 C0 D0

A1 B1 C1 D1

A2 B2 C2 D2

A3 B3 C3 D3

X0

A0 A1 A2 A3

B0 B1 B2 B3

C0 C1 C2 C3

D0 D1 D2 D3

ΣX

Host

PE 7Mod. SPad

SPad

Bank 1
1 9Mod. 57

8
8

Bank

8B

PE 1
PE 15
Mod.

ReduceScatter (RS)

63

8
8

Mod.
8

AlltoAll (AA)

8

PE 63

X0

64

X1

X2

Scatter (Sc)

Fig. 1. Internal architecture of commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs.

X1

X2

X3

ΣX

ΣX

ΣX

AllReduce (AR)

X0

X0 X1 X2 X3

(b) PID-Comm Design
8B

AllGather (AG)

X1

X3

X2

X3

X0

X1

X2

X0 X1 X2 X3

ΣX

Gather (Ga)

Reduce (Re)

X3

X0
X0

X0

X0

X0

Broadcast (Br)

Fig. 2. Illustrations of eight representative collective communication primitives among four nodes.

hypercube, users can invoke multi-instance collective communication [91] with high performance over various dimensions.
To realize the virtual hypercube model and provide high
performance, PID-Comm uses a set of novel techniques to mitigate bottlenecks in the conventional approaches. Specifically,
we devise algorithmic tricks such that 1) the computational
burden of the host is reduced, 2) host memory access is
eliminated, and 3) domain transfer between PIM and host is
avoided, while providing flexible abstractions to the user.
We implement PID-Comm on a real system equipped with
16 UPMEM DIMMs [21]. Our evaluation reveals that PIDComm achieves speedup up to 5.19× with widely-used collective communication primitives. We also implement several
benchmark applications that require the flexibility PID-Comm,
and achieve up to 3.99× speedup over the conventional interPE communication mechanism. To the best of our knowledge,
PID-Comm is the first framework to target fast and flexible
inter-PE communication on commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs.
We will open-source PID-Comm once the paper gets accepted
for publication. We make the following key contributions:
• We reveal that commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs greatly
suffer from high inter-PE communication overheads and
limited applicability due to the lack of a fast and flexible
communication framework.
• We propose PID-Comm, an inter-PE communication framework designed for the PIM-enabled DIMMs. PID-Comm
abstracts the PEs as a virtual hypercube and allows collective communication along the chosen dimensions.
• PID-Comm supports eight widely used collective communication primitives and provides fast implementations
optimized for PIM-enabled DIMMs.
• PID-Comm greatly improves the performance of applications involving diverse and complex inter-PE communication patterns with real commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs.
• We will publish PID-Comm available as open-source, to
facilitate research along similar directions.

inside (usually 8). In such a setting, each chip has 8-bit buses,
which are concatenated to form the 64-bit bus of a channel.
Then, a chip contains multiple banks (usually 8). The chips
in a rank work in unison, so accessing bank 0 of chip 0 will
also access bank 0 of chips 1–7 simultaneously. Because of
this, a 64b word is split into 8b segments and gets spread
among the 8 banks (e.g., banks 0–7 or banks 56–63). We
refer to those sets of banks (or the associated PEs) as an
entangled group. Accessing an entire entangled group together
is critical for utilizing all the memory bandwidth from 64bit bus. Commodity PIM-enabled DIMMs attach a PE and a
scratchpad memory, called working random access memory
(WRAM), to each of their memory banks. The memory
banks are referred to as the main random access memories
(MRAMs). As the PEs can directly access the banks, the
aggregate bandwidth from the PEs to the banks is an order
of magnitude higher than that of the external bus.
B. Domain Transfer
Due to the aforementioned segmented data placement, a PE
would not be able to process data elements larger than 8 bits.
To handle this, when data are transferred between the PIMenabled DIMMs and host CPUs, the device driver [95] running
on the CPUs automatically rearranges the data behind the
scenes using vector instructions so that a full 64b word (bytes
0-7 in Figure 1) can be placed in a single bank. We refer to this
as domain transfer between the PIM domain and host domain;
the data are not lost, but cannot be interpreted when placed
as-is in the other domain. Domain transfer rearranges the first
8 bits of each element in the first 8 bytes of the vector register,
the second 8 bits in the next 8 bytes, and so on until all 64
bytes of sequential data are reordered. This ensures that once
the 64-byte domain-transferred data is transferred to PEs, a full
8-byte element occupies each bank. Although this process is
transparent to the end users, this domain transfer incurs large
performance overheads as revealed by prior work [28]–[30],
[37], [63] and will be demonstrated in § III.

II. BACKGROUND
A. PIM-enabled DIMMs and Entangled Groups

C. Collective Communications

PIM-enabled DIMMs implement PIM on dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs) with processing elements (PEs) attached near their memory banks [21], [56], [70]. Figure 1
depicts the internal hierarchy of such architecture [21]. Following modern DDR DIMM architectures [39], a channel is
composed of multiple ranks that are independent but share
the same 64-bit external bus. A rank comprises multiple chips

Collective communication refers to a set of communication
patterns widely used for parallel programming, where multiple
nodes are coordinated to exchange data and perform computations. It is widely used in high-performance computing [15],
[55], and more recently by machine learning [9], [18], [76],
[87]. Due to its popularity, collective communication libraries

2

