DAC APO: Accelerating Continuous Learning in
Autonomous Systems for Video Analytics
Yoonsung Kim Changhun Oh Jinwoo Hwang Wonung Kim Seongryong Oh
Yubin Lee Hardik Sharma†∗ Amir Yazdanbakhsh‡ Jongse Park
KAIST

† Meta

‡ Google DeepMind

{yskim, choh, jwhwang, wukim, sroh, yblee}@casys.kaist.ac.kr
hardiksharma@meta.com ayazdan@google.com jspark@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Inference Data

Abstract—Deep neural network (DNN) video analytics is
crucial for autonomous systems such as self-driving vehicles,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and security robots. However,
real-world deployment faces challenges due to their limited
computational resources and battery power. To tackle these
challenges, continuous learning exploits a lightweight “student”
model at deployment (inference), leverages a larger “teacher”
model for labeling sampled data (labeling), and continuously
retrains the student model to adapt to changing scenarios
(retraining). This paper highlights the limitations in state-of-theart continuous learning systems: (1) they focus on computations
for retraining, while overlooking the compute needs for inference
and labeling, (2) they rely on power-hungry GPUs, unsuitable for
battery-operated autonomous systems, and (3) they are located on
a remote centralized server, intended for multi-tenant scenarios,
again unsuitable for autonomous systems due to privacy, network
availability, and latency concerns. We propose a hardwarealgorithm co-designed solution for continuous learning, DAC APO,
that enables autonomous systems to perform concurrent executions of inference, labeling, and retraining in a performant
and energy-efficient manner. DAC APO comprises (1) a spatiallypartitionable and precision-flexible accelerator enabling parallel
execution of kernels on sub-accelerators at their respective
precisions, and (2) a spatiotemporal resource allocation algorithm that strategically navigates the resource-accuracy tradeoff
space, facilitating optimal decisions for resource allocation to
achieve maximal accuracy. Our evaluation shows that DAC APO
achieves 6.5% and 5.5% higher accuracy than a state-of-theart GPU-based continuous learning systems, Ekya and EOMU,
respectively, while consuming 254× less power.

Input
Video
Frames

Inference Results
1 Inference

Inference
Data
Sampler

2 Retraining

Retraining Data

Sampled data
Non-sampled data

Retraining
Data
Sampler

3 Labeling

Labeled
Retraining Data

Fig. 1: Overview of continuously learning video analytics on
autonomous systems. To address privacy, networking cost, and
latency concerns, autonomous systems exclusively use constrained computing resources to concurrently execute the three
continuous learning kernels – (1) inference, (2) retraining, and
(3) labeling – which presents a performance challenge.
is far beyond the capabilities of real-world systems. Although
sampling can decrease computational demands, it often compromises accuracy, especially in videos captured by moving
cameras, a frequent condition in autonomous systems.
To address this issue, continuous learning (CL), an emerging algorithmic methodology, has gained significant attention in recent years [5], [27], [34], [46]. This innovative
approach enables autonomous systems to perform inference
using lightweight “student” DNN models, which results in
reduced resource consumption. However, the limited generality of the lightweight student models gives rise to the data
drift problem, where live video data deviates from training
data. Continuous learning incorporates constant on-the-spot
retrainings, which introduce a new computational challenge,
as the systems must now handle not only inference, but also
labeling and retraining, as illustrated in Figure 1. We denote
these three tasks as continuous learning kernels in this paper.
Two recent pioneering works, Ekya [5] and RECL [46],
propose initial system designs for continuously learning video
analytics. Although these works have paved the way for a
new research direction, their direct deployment to autonomous
systems is infeasible due to the following reasons: (1) these
systems overlook the necessity of computation for label-

I. I NTRODUCTION
Live video analytics is key to enable seamless functionality of interactive autonomous systems, such as autonomous
driving vehicles [10], [25], [35], [38], [42], [87], [93], unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [55], [56], [59], [60], [101],
and security surveillance robots [7]–[9], [24], [71], [79],
[92]. Real-time analysis of live videos is indispensable for
comprehending rapidly changing environmental conditions, a
pivotal aspect that ensures the successful execution of the
autonomous systems’ missions.
Modern video analytics heavily relies on the capabilities
of deep neural networks (DNNs). However, the computational
demand to execute DNN inference on individual video frames
∗ This work was done at Google.

1

ing and inference, a factor that could be substantial for
battery-operated, resource-constrained autonomous systems;
(2) they assume excessively rich computation resources for
autonomous systems; and (3) they are designed to be deployed
on a remote centralized server, intended for multi-tenant
scenarios. For instance, Ekya [5] runs on a multi-GPU edge
server and RECL [46] offloads the retraining computation to
the scalable cloud, both largely focusing on the retraining
computations of multiple models.
In this paper, we propose a hardware-software co-designed
acceleration solution, DAC APO, that overcomes the limitations of existing systems and enables effective deployment of
continuously learning video analytics on autonomous systems
without the need for remote access to abundant resources. In
designing DAC APO, we identify the following challenges:
• Challenge 1: DAC APO must offer significantly higher
performance and energy efficiency compared to the existing high-performance computing platforms such as
GPUs, to effectively implement continuous learning for
video analytics on battery-operated autonomous systems.
• Challenge 2: DAC APO requires a flexible and dynamically reconfigurable accelerator architecture to rapidly
adapt to the changing resource demands of the three
continuous learning kernels when data drifts occur.
• Challenge 3: DAC APO must be able to capture the
resource-accuracy tradeoff of the continuous learning
kernels and efficiently utilize the computing resources to
maximize the resulting accuracy.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we make the
following contributions.
• Spatially-partitionable and precision-flexible accelerator architecture. We architect the DAC APO accelerator, employing a spatially-partitionable architecture, which can be dynamically composed into subaccelerators (SAs). The design principle aims to attain
flexibility for better resource utilization without imposing
unnecessarily large overhead to enable this adaptability.
To this end, the DAC APO accelerator is organized as
vertically-stacked rows of processing elements in which
the rows can be partitioned and grouped into two subaccelerators. A processing element in DAC APO performs
a vector dot product rather than a multiplication, which
we call Dot-Product Engine (DPE), leveraging recently
proposed MX-based precision-flexible arithmetic to unleash higher performance and energy-efficiency from the
accelerator. This spatial sharing and precision configurability are the keys that enable DAC APO to obtain orders
of magnitude higher efficiency and allow the three kernels
to fully utilize the given resources for maximal accuracy.
• Spatiotemporal resource allocation algorithm for maximal accuracy. Resource requirements for the three
kernels vary depending on the runtime scenarios that
constantly change. A key insight driving our resource
allocation algorithm is that labeling plays a pivotal role
in the occurrence of data drifts for promptly collecting
retraining data with new data patterns, requiring relatively

more computing resources. To maximize accuracy using
the limited resources, we devise a spatiotemporal resource allocation algorithm that makes static (spatial) and
dynamic (temporal) decisions for resource allocations.
First, at offline, the algorithm statically partitions the
accelerator into two sub-accelerators, T-SA and B-SA,
based on the resource requirement of inference to keep
up with the input frame rate. Then, during runtime,
the algorithm dynamically detects data drifts through
constant accuracy validations and when it is detected, the
algorithm allocates more time slots for labeling until the
dataset is sufficiently updated (temporal decision).
To evaluate DAC APO’s effectiveness, we use three pairs of
(student, teacher) object recognition models (see Table III)
and the BDD100K driving video dataset. We model three
types of data drift: (1) task change by addition or removal of
object labels, (2) transitions between daytime and nighttime,
and (3) location change between city and highway. These data
drifts are mixed to synthesize size different workload scenarios
representing diverse real-world situations that autonomous
systems would face. We develop DAC APO using Verilog
RTL and synthesize it using Synopsys Design Compiler with
TSMC 28nm technology. To cross-validate the cycle-accurate
behaviors of DAC APO, we also develop an in-house simulator
built upon SCALE-Sim [77].
Our evaluation shows that DAC APO achieves 6.5% and
5.5% higher accuracy than the two state-of-the-art GPU-based
continuous learning systems, Ekya and EOMU, respectively.
Furthermore, we observe that DAC APO achieves the accuracy
improvement, consuming 254× less energy compared to the
GPU baseline. These advantages highlight DAC APO’s role
in connecting the algorithmic advancements in continuous
learning to their practical deployment on autonomous systems.
Our tools, including system and hardware simulators and
a continuous learning benchmark suite with datasets, are
available at https://github.com/casys-kaist/DaCapo.
II. BACKGROUND
This paper aims to develop an acceleration solution for
continuously learning video analytics on autonomous systems.
In this section, we briefly outline the target problem and
introduce existing solutions.
A. Video Analytics in Autonomous Systems
Modern autonomous systems leverage compute-heavy deep
neural network (DNN) models for complex video analytics.
Constrained by limited resources, these systems struggle to
meet latency requirements, often requiring compromises that
can entail frame drops and a potential reduction in overall
analytical quality. Recently, using less capable yet lightweight
DNN models has been introduced as a viable solution [4],
[36], [37], [48], allowing the systems to match the inference
rate with the frame rate. However, the customized models
present a new challenge known as data drift, where live video
data diverges from the training data, consequently reducing
the accuracy of the lightweight models.

2

