Waferscale Network Switches
Shuangliang Chen

Saptadeep Pal

Rakesh Kumar

UIUC

Etched AI

UIUC

Abstract—In spite of being a key determinant of latency, cost,
power, space, and capability of modern computer systems, network
switch radix has not seen much growth over the years due to poor
scaling of off-chip IO pitches and switch die sizes. We consider
waferscale integration (WSI) as a way to increase the size of the
switch substrate to be much bigger than a single die and ask the
question: can we use WSI to enable network switches that have
dramatically higher radix than today’s switches? We show that
while a waferscale network switch can support up to 32x higher
radix than state-of-the-art network switches when only area constraints are considered, the actual radix of a waferscale network
switch is not area-limited. Rather, it is limited by a combination
of internal bandwidth, external bandwidth, and power density. In
fact, without optimizations, benefits of a waferscale network switch
are minimal. To address the scalability bottlenecks, we propose a
heterogeneous network switch design that reduces switch power by
30.8%-33.5% which, in turn, allows an increase in radix (by up to
4x) by increasing internal I/O bandwidth at the expense of energy
efficiency. We also propose subswitch deradixing that increases
the overall radix by 2x by decreasing the radix of the subswitches
to alleviate the internal I/O bottleneck. We use Area I/O and
Optical I/O schemes to alleviate the external I/O bandwidth
bottlenecks of conventional SerDes-based external connectivity. In
addition to scalability optimization, we present optimizations such
as low latency buffering and proprietary routing that improve the
performance of waferscale switches. Finally, we present a system
architecture for a waferscale network switch that supports its port
count, power delivery, and cooling requirements in a compact
form factor. We show that the switch can be used to enable new
computing systems such as single-switch datacenters and massivescale singular GPUs. It can also lead to a dramatic reduction in
datacenter network costs. Overall, this is the first work quantifying
the benefits of waferscale switches and identifying and addressing
the unique challenges and opportunities in building them.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: (a) Scaling of radix and total switching bandwidth
during 2010-2022. (b) Number of IO pins per mm2 from 1999
to 2023 for BGA and LGA packaging technologies [15].
8x over the last 12 years (Figure 1.a). This relative anemic
growth (compared to total bandwidth, for example) is due
to poor scaling of off-chip IO pitches [48] as well as poor
scaling of switch die sizes [58]. Figure 1.b shows that the
density of connections (number of I/Os/mm2 ) for the ball
grid array (BGA) and land grid array (LGA) technologies has
increased only by 8x and 2.6x respectively over the last 24
years. Switch die sizes scale even slower since the maximum
chip size is dictated by reticle limits during lithography. The
biggest monolithic chip for the 5nm node, for example, does
not exceed 858 mm2 [53].
Since I/O pitches are notoriously difficult to scale [48], any
large increase in network switch radix must come from a new
approach to increasing the size of the switch substrate to be
much bigger than a single die.
The last few years have seen the introduction and commercialization of waferscale integration (WSI) technologies that
can support computing systems to be built on substrates as
large as a wafer [26], [33], [40], [59] (Table I). This manifold
increase in system size over a reticle-limited die has enabled
orders of magnitude higher computing performance [40], [49],
[59]. However, no prior work has looked at building a network
switch at waferscale. In this work, we ask the question: can
we use WSI to enable network switches that have dramatically
higher radix than today’s switches?

I. I NTRODUCTION
The importance of network switch radix - the number of
bidirectional ports soldered onto a switch ASIC - in modern
computing infrastructure cannot be overstated. In the context
of datacenters, switch radix dictates the depth of the network
topology and, therefore, the latency of communication between
nodes [38]. It also dictates the number of switching devices
and optical links required for connections and, therefore, the
cost, power, and space requirements of the network [39].
In the context of high-performance computing systems, the
switch radix can dictate the size (amount of memory and
compute) and performance of the system that can be built. In
the context of dedicated AI/ML training clusters (e.g., DGX
GH200 [8]), it can even dictate the size of the largest models
that can be trained (by dictating the number of GPUs and their
interconnection bandwidth in a cluster, for example).
Despite this, network switch radix has not seen much growth
over the years - the maximum radix has increased only by

Technology
I/O Pitch (µm)
Interconnect Wire Pitch (µm)
Maximum Sizes/Dies
Inter-die Distance (mm)
BW Density (Gbps/mm/layer)
Energy/b (pJ/bit)
Latency (ns)

Silicon Interposer [42]
3-10
2-10
8.5 cm2
50
1000
0.25
0.1

Si-IF [33]
2-10
1-10
Full Wafer
1-100
800-1600
0.06-4
0.04-10

InFO-SoW [26]
80-150
20
Full Wafer
10-50
1000-3200
1.5-3
10-15

TABLE I: Technologies that can enable chiplet-based waferscale integration (vs a silicon interposer).
To keep yield and design complexity manageable, we study
waferscale integration of Tomahawk 5 (TH-5)-like chips in-

1

Total Power (W)
w/o I/O Power (W)
Area (mm2 )

500 [13]
400
800 [13]

Configuration 1
Configuration 2
Configuration 3

256x200Gbps
128x400Gbps
64x800Gbps

radix. To address the external bandwidth bottleneck, we use
Area I/O (where a mezzanine PCB allows external bandwidth
I/O to scale with substrate area) and Optical I/O (which uses
on-substrate chiplets for electrical-to-optical and optical-toelectrical I/O conversion) schemes (Section III). We quantify
the impact of our optimizations on switch radix size and power.
We also quantify the performance improvements possible from
a waferscale switch as well the new opportunities for switch
microarchitecture that it enables (Section VI).
A waferscale network switch also presents a unique system
architecture challenge. Compactly supporting a switch with one
to two orders of magnitude higher port count while meeting the
extraordinary power delivery and cooling requirements require
careful design. We present a system architecture of a waferscale
network switch (Section VIII) that takes up no more than
20RU of space while supporting the power delivery and cooling
needs for the switch. We then use this system architecture to
demonstrate the end-to-end benefits of a waferscale network
switch. We show that such a switch can enable single-switch
data centers with up to 8192 servers. It can also enable a
singular GPU that is eight times larger than the largest singular
GPU today built using an NVSwitch network. It can also
significantly reduce the number of switches and optical cables
in a hyperscale datacenter network by 3x-10x.
This paper makes the following key contributions:

TABLE II: Tomahawk 5 (TH-5) parameters used in this work.

Fig. 2: A high-level diagram of a 3x3 waferscale network
switch architecture with Optical I/O chiplets. Chip-to-chip links
and chip-to-I/O links are passive interposer traces embedded in
the substrate with a pitch size of 4 µm. Optical signals from
optical fibers are converted to electrical signals and forwarded
to SSCs through chip-to-I/O links. Connections between SSCs
are accomplished using on-chip links and chip-to-chip links.
Power delivery to each SSC is done with through-wafer-vias.
terconnected in a Clos topology to enable a higher radix
switch. TH-5 [13] is a state-of-the-art high radix network switch
from Broadcom that supports configurations listed in Table
II and has a reported power (area) of 500W (800mm2 ). We
derive the non-I/O power of TH-5 by assuming an I/O energy
consumption of 2 pJ/bit [10]. A large number of 800mm2 TH5-like chips (sub-switch chiplets or SSCs) can fit on a wafer,
potentially enabling a high radix switch. Figure 2 shows a highlevel diagram of such device.
We find very quickly that the radix of a waferscale network
switch is limited not by the area of the substrate, but rather
by the internal bandwidth of connections between the SSCs
(Section IV). A large number of logical connections is needed
to support a Clos topology, especially at higher levels, saturating the physical bandwidth density available between adjacent
SSCs. We also find that external bandwidth may become a
bottleneck when using the conventional SerDes-based external
connectivity using wafer periphery. Finally, power density may
become a bottleneck and limit the radix that can be supported
for a given cooling mechanism.
To address the power density bottleneck, we propose a
heterogeneous network switch (Section V). Instead of allidentical SSCs, we replace some of the SSCs in the Clos with
lower-radix SSCs. This can lead to significant power reduction
since the power of an SSC decreases superlinearly with its
radix. This power reduction allows an increase in radix by
increasing internal I/O bandwidth at the expense of energy
efficiency. To address the internal bandwidth bottleneck, we
propose subswitch deradixing. In this optimization, we decrease
the radix supported by each sub-switch without reducing the
area of the SSC. This increases the number of I/Os per port
for the subswitch and, therefore, increases the overall switch

We show that a waferscale network switch can support up
to 32x higher radix than state-of-the-art network switches
when only area constraints are considered.
• We show that the actual radix of a waferscale network
switch is not area-limited. Rather, it is limited by a
combination of internal bandwidth, external bandwidth,
and power density. Without optimizations, the benefits of
a waferscale network switch are minimal.
• We propose a heterogeneous network switch design that
reduces switch power by 30.8%-33.5% which, in turn,
allows an increase in radix (by up to 4x) by increasing
internal I/O bandwidth at the expense of energy efficiency.
We propose subswitch deradixing that increases the overall
radix by 2x by decreasing the radix of the subswitches
to alleviate the internal I/O bottleneck. We quantify the
effectiveness of Area I/O and Optical I/O schemes in
alleviating the external I/O bandwidth bottleneck caused
when the wafer periphery is used for conventional SerDesbased external connectivity.
• We present a system architecture for a waferscale network
switch that supports its port count, power delivery, and
cooling requirements in a compact form factor. We show
that the switch can be used to enable new computing
systems such as single-switch datacenters and massivescale singular GPUs. It can also lead to a dramatic
reduction in datacenter network costs.
• We show that a waferscale switch opens up opportunities for performance and microarchitectural optimizations,
including low latency buffering and proprietary routing.
Overall, this is the first work quantifying the benefits of
waferscale switches and identifying and addressing the
•

2

