2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Barre Chord: Efficient Virtual Memory Translation
for Multi-Chip-Module GPUs
Yuan Feng∗ , Seonjin Na† , Hyesoon Kim† , Hyeran Jeon∗
∗ University of California, Merced † Georgia Institute of Technology

{yfeng44, hjeon7}@ucmerced.edu, seonjin.na@gatech.edu, hyesoon@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract—With the advancement of processor packaging technology and the looming end of Moore’s law, multi-chip-module
(MCM) GPUs become a promising architecture to continue the
performance scaling. However, due to the increasing concurrency,
it is challenging to achieve scalable performance. In this study, we
show that the limited parallelism in IOMMU is one of the critical
bottlenecks and propose Barre Chord to fundamentally reduce
the translation loads. By leveraging the unique GPU execution
model and page mapping on MCM-GPUs, Barre translates
virtual addresses in a unit of coalescing group. Once one page
is translated, all the other pages within the same coalescing
group can be translated with simple calculations without page
table walks. Full Barre (F-Barre) further reduces translations by
enabling intra-MCM translation through coalescing information
sharing across GPU chiplets and contiguity-aware coalescing
group expansion. With the combination of Barre and F-Barre, the
Barre Chord outperforms state-of-the-art solutions by an average
of 1.36× (2.09× with coalescing group expansion) with negligible
area overhead (4.22% of a GPU L2 TLB).

Fig. 1: Speedups with 8, 16, 32, and infinite PTWs
walks and IOMMU accesses from the translation process,
respectively. Barre rethinks the virtual memory translation in
the context of MCM-GPU and reduces the address translation
overheads by exploiting the unique GPU execution model and
data mapping patterns. An MCM-GPU consists of multiple
GPU chiplets; each chiplet has its local memory. In an MCMGPU, applications process a large data on multiple GPU
chiplets. The large data allocates many pages across GPU
chiplets and each page needs to be mapped from virtual
space to physical space individually. Barre takes the unique
opportunity of such multi-GPU-chiplet processing to map the
pages much more structurally, which enables skipping many
page table walks fundamentally.
For an application, GPU chiplets run the same program
code. Thus, the pages of each data tend to be accessed in
similar timings across GPU chiplets. By leveraging this fact,
Barre proposes to map the pages of each data on the same
physical locations across GPU chiplets so that their addresses
can be translated together. We call those pages mapped on the
same physical address across GPU chiplets as a coalescing
group. In other words, the pages within the same coalescing
group have the same physical address except for the GPU
chiplet ID. Therefore, once we know a page’s physical address,
we can calculate the physical address of all the other pages
in the same coalescing group, without expensive page table
walks. The coalescing group is created at the time of page
allocation and is mapped to any physical pages that are
commonly available across GPU chiplets. If there are not
commonly available pages, the pages are mapped individually
as in the conventional page mapping scheme. The coalescing
group information is encoded in the unused bits in the page
table entry (PTE).
Super pages [5], [24], [37] also allocate large data into
physical space systemically. However, a super page is required to map on consecutive large physical space. Barre

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the packaging technology evolution, Multi-ChipModule (MCM) GPUs have been introduced to continue the
performance scaling in the post-Moore era. Though MCM
design can help increase computing power, there are new
challenges such as the non-uniform memory access (NUMA)
effect and the increased burden of virtual memory translation.
Several studies have effectively reduced NUMA effect through
various page mapping strategies and remote data caching
and coalescing [3], [8], [20], [40]. Though these solutions
indirectly reduce the address translation overhead by enabling
GPU chiplets to find more data and translations from local
memory, we still observe enough room to improve performance. For example, Fig 1 shows an almost linear speedup
with more page table walkers (PTWs). However, when we use
infinite PTWs, the speedup is saturated to around 2×. This
is because adding more PTWs is only effective in reducing
PTW queueing delay while leaving the other latencies (e.g.,
page table walk and IOMMU access) in the translation process
unchanged. There should be a more comprehensive solution
that considers the entire translation process and fundamentally
reduces translation costs.
In this paper, we propose Barre Chord1 that introduces
a novel translation method for MCM-GPUs. Barre Chord
consists of Barre and Full-Barre2 , each removes page table
1 A guitar chord that presses down multiple strings over a fret with a finger.
2 A special type of Barre Chord that presses all six strings with a finger.

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00065

834

Super Page -Migration

3

Baseline-4KB-Migration
L2 Cache

Speedup

2.5

GPU Chip

GPU Package
CU

CU

L1V Cache
L1V Cache
L1V Cache

2

CacheSIMD
SIMD
SIMD
SIMD L1V
SIMD
SIMD
SIMD
SIMD
Reg
RegSIMD Reg
SIMD Reg
SIMD
SIMD
SIMD
SIMD
Reg SIMD
Reg SIMD
Reg
Reg Reg Reg Reg Reg

1.5

Reg

1
0.5

Reg

Reg

corr

fft

pr

fwt

sssp

nw

matr

gups

bicg

Core 0
Core 1

mean

Fig. 2: Speedup with 2MB super page when migration is
enabled

Front
Caches

PTW

IOMMU

PTW
PTW

CU

Page Table

CU

CU

L2 TLB

L2 TLB

CU

CU

DRAM
CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

L1 TLB L1 TLB
L1 TLB L1 TLB

L1 TLB L1 TLB
L1 TLB L1 TLB

L2 TLB

L2 TLB

DRAM
PCIe

does not have such restrictions and it coalesces pages across
GPU chiplets only for passing address translation information
among multiple pages. Also, the performance benefit of super
pages is limited in an MCM-GPU due to distributed memory
mapping. With super page, a few hot pages will be mapped on
fewer GPU chiplets and lead to more remote memory accesses
and migrations [41]. As shown in Fig 2, some applications
(fwt and matr) experience a significant performance drop
due to increased remote memory accesses and higher page
migration penalties.
Besides super page, address translation overhead has been
tackled with various other solutions such as L2 TLB sharing [8], [27] and translation prefetch on single- and multi-GPU
platforms. The impact of L2 TLB sharing is diminishing in
MCM-GPUs because advanced page mapping algorithms [20],
[30], [41] reduce remote data accesses; thus, less chance of
finding translations in remote TLBs. The increased concurrency in an MCM-GPU drops prefetching accuracy because
the translation requests lose patterns as shown in Fig 5. In
the CPU domain, hashed page table has been used to enable
calculation-based page translation. But, the hashed page tables
have issues of hash collision, impracticality of sharing pages
by multiple processes, and inflexible page mapping. Barre does
not have such problems.
While Barre removes many page table walks, each translation mandates an IOMMU access. To reduce the hassle
of IOMMU access, Barre Chord proposes Full Barre (FBarre), which enables intra-MCM translation. F-Barre extends
Barre by allowing GPU chiplets to share the coalescing
group information. With the coalescing group information,
addresses can be calculated without accessing IOMMU. InterGPU TLB sharing [8], [27] can also reduce IOMMU accesses.
However, it mandates remote GPU chiplet access upon every
TLB misses. On the other hand, F-Barre does not need to
access remote GPU chiplet if the TLB has at least one page’s
address that is in the same coalescing group with the requested
page. Note that when GMMU is used instead of IOMMU,
F-Barre can also remove GMMU accesses through this coalescing information sharing. F-Barre also opportunistically
expands coalescing groups. When multiple coalescing groups
are mapped on consecutive physical pages, F-Barre merges
them such that one translation can calculate all pages in the
enlarged coalescing group.
Barre outperforms two state-of-the-art solutions [8], [27] by
an average of 12.8% up to 41%. F-Barre escalates the average
speedup to 1.36× (2.09× with coalescing group expansion).

CU

L1 TLB L1 TLB
L1 TLB L1 TLB

DRAM

Host CPU
PW Queue

CU

L1 TLB L1 TLB
L1 TLB L1 TLB

Reg

Compute Unit

0

CU

DRAM
ATS Packets

Fig. 3: Baseline MCM-GPU architecture
Our contributions are as below.
• We show that limited parallelism in IOMMU is one of
the critical performance bottlenecks in MCM-GPUs and
analyze the challenges in applying conventional solutions
to MCM-GPUs.
• We propose a novel virtual memory translation method,
Barre Chord, which fundamentally reduces the demands
for page table walks by exploiting the unique architecture
and page mappings of MCM-GPUs.
• The proposed Barre Chord introduces a novel coalescing
group-level calculation-based translation, which provides
better performance while not sacrificing the flexibility of
page table-based translations.
II. BACKGROUND
A. MCM-GPU architecture and address translation
Fig 3 shows a typical architecture of modern MCM-GPUs.
A CPU is connected to an MCM-GPU through PCIe. The
MCM-GPU has multiple GPU chiplets that are connected via
a high-speed interconnect network. Each GPU chiplet has a
dedicated memory. CPU and MCM-GPU use a flat virtual
address. The unified virtual memory is implemented with an
IOMMU residing in the host CPU to govern the translations of
all IO devices including MCM-GPU [8], [27], [40]. Computing
units (CUs) have a private L1 TLB and a shared L2 TLB. Upon
L2 TLB miss, an address translation service (ATS) packet
is sent to the IOMMU through PCIe. Page table walks are
handled by 8-16 threads [8], [27] with multiple page table
walkers (PTWs). The requests are enqueued to a page walk
queue (PW-queue) to be served by PTWs.
B. Page mapping policies in MCM-GPU
In an MCM-GPU, as each GPU chiplet has a local memory
and can access remote GPU chiplet’s memory, memory access
latency is non-uniform. Various page mapping algorithms have
been proposed to reduce the lengthy remote memory accesses
among GPU chiplets [3], [7], [20], [30], [40]. LASP [20]
considers locality when mapping pages to minimize the remote memory accesses. LASP analyzes data access pattern
at compile time and maps consecutive a few pages in either
row- and column dimension on the same GPU chiplet. The
cooperative thread arrays (CTAs) that access those pages are
co-located on the same GPU chiplet to reduce remote memory
accesses. This locality information is used by the GPU driver

835

