2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

UDP: Utility-Driven Fetch Directed Instruction
Prefetching
Surim Oh

Mingsheng Xu

Tanvir Ahmed Khan

University of California, Santa Cruz
USA
soh31@ucsc.edu

University of California, Santa Cruz
USA
mxu61@ucsc.edu

Columbia University
USA
tk3070@columbia.edu

Baris Kasikci

Heiner Litz

University of Washington
USA
baris@cs.washington.edu

University of California, Santa Cruz
USA
hlitz@ucsc.edu

20
IPC Speedup (%)

Abstract—Datacenter applications exhibit large instruction
footprints causing significant instruction cache misses and, as
a result, frontend stalls. To address this issue, instruction
prefetching mechanisms have been proposed, including state-ofthe-art techniques such as fetch-directed instruction prefetching.
However, our study shows that existing implementations still fall
far short of an ideal system with a perfect instruction cache. In
particular, up to 588.47% of potential IPC speedup of existing
processors hides due to frontend stalls, and these frontend stalls
are due to inaccurate and untimely instruction prefetches. We
quantify the impact of these individual effects, observing that
applications exhibit different characteristics that call for adaptive
application-specific optimizations. Based on these insights, we
propose two novel mechanisms, UDP and UFTQ, to improve
the accuracy of FDIP without negatively affecting timeliness
while leveraging prefetches on the wrong path. We evaluate
our technique on 10 data center workloads showing a maximal
IPC improvement of 16.1% and an average IPC improvement
of 3.6%. Our techniques only introduce moderate hardware
modifications and a storage cost of 8KB.
Index Terms—Instruction prefetching, frontend stalls, data
center.

588.5

15
10
5
0
ql es g cc al or b at st ki g
myspostgr clan g drupverilamt ongod tomc xgbooediawi Av
m
Benchmarks

Fig. 1. Ideal icache speedup over today’s FDIP baseline. The ideal speedup
is in the range of 2.69% to 588.47%.

as prefetching engines. FDIP decouples the branch prediction
from the instruction fetch. By predicting future instructions
faster, the branch prediction unit can run ahead of the fetch
engine while emitting prefetches to hide the memory access
latency of instruction fetches. FDIP is widely adopted by
the industry and implemented on commercial processors [44],
[50], [57] as it introduces only small hardware overheads while
providing high prefetching accuracy as long as the branch
predictor performs well.
Unfortunately, large code-footprint applications generally
also contain many branches exceeding the capacity of the
branch target buffer (BTB). BTB misses (and branch mispredictions) limit the accuracy of FDIP, as after suffering from a
BTB miss, the frontend will be on the wrong path, prefetching
unuseful instruction cache lines while polluting the icache.
To quantify this problem, Figure 1 compares the performance
improvement of a perfect icache (every access is a hit)
against the state-of-the-art FDIP baseline. As can be seen,
for most of the data center applications, the perfect icache
provides a speedup of 2.69% to 39%, while for xgboost
and verilator, the IPC improvement is up to 7× and 4×.
Prior work, including Boomerang [38], Shotgun [37], and
Confluence [30] try to address this challenge by improving

I. I NTRODUCTION
The instruction footprint of modern data center applications
significantly exceeds the size of any of today’s server’s instruction caches (icaches). To make matters worse, Google
and Facebook have reported that their code sizes increase
at a rate of up to 20% per year while processor caches
have experienced only moderate gains in size over the last
decade. These footprints cause frequent icache misses leading
to frontend stalls, as the CPU pipeline is waiting for the next
instructions to be fetched from memory. Google has reported
that processors in their fleet spend almost a quarter of their
cycles on these misses [16], resulting in inefficiencies worth
millions of dollars while causing significant carbon emissions.
To address this challenge, prior work has explored instruction prefetching mechanisms. Reinman has introduced Fetch
Directed Prefetching (FDIP) [47], a hardware prefetching technique that exploits existing resources such as branch predictors

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00089

324.1 39.4

1188

the hit rate of the BTB. All three works introduce significant
hardware complexity and storage overheads and, hence, have
not been adopted in existing processor designs. They also do
not address the problem of branch mispredictions and hence do
not address the root cause of the problem: executing unuseful
prefetches on the wrong path. To the best of our knowledge,
Ishii [28] represents the state-of-the-art FDIP implementation
deployed by today’s processors. It features a large BTB, partly
solving the BTB capacity issue while introducing feasible to
implement techniques such as taken-only branch history and
post-fetch correction. Another line of work has proposed to
utilize software prefetching [16], [31], [32], however, these
techniques require profiling and re-compilation and cannot
adapt to dynamic workload changes.
We propose a different approach for addressing the existing
frontend bottleneck for data center applications. Towards this
goal, we investigate the state-of-the-art FDIP implementation
to understand why it falls short of the ideal performance
provided by a perfect icache. In particular, we analyze whether
FDIP mainly suffers from inaccurate wrong-path prefetches
(polluting icaches) or from untimely late-prefetches. These two
causes are intrinsically connected, as for prefetch timeliness,
the frontend needs to run ahead as far as possible, while
for ensuring prefetching accuracy, it is beneficial to limit
the number of prefetches emitted on the wrong-path. Our
analysis determines the usefulness of prefetches both on the
on-path and off-path and explores how the frequency of
branch mispredictions and their recovery affect the behavior
of FDIP. Our analysis reveals that existing techniques fail
to ensure timeliness while emitting many inaccurate wrongpath prefetches. Wrong-path prefetches frequently pollute the
icache, jeopardizing the effect of FDIP whose aim is to reduce
icache misses.
To address this challenge, we propose two new mechanisms
for improving the efficacy of FDIP. First, we introduce UFTQ,
which adapts the runahead distance of FDIP dynamically and
in an application-specific way by configuring the depth of
the fetch target queue (FTQ). We show that tuning the FTQ
depth dynamically can improve the timeliness and usefulness
of prefetches providing an IPC improvement of up to 37.2%
and of 4.9% on average.
To further improve the efficiency of FDIP, we introduce
UDP, which increases performance further over UFTQ by
learning the utility of individual prefetch candidates. We
propose an efficient implementation to learn the utility of
prefetch candidates proposed by FDIP, including useful offpath prefetches. In particular, our technique learns useful offpath prefetches that correspond to code locations after the
merge point1 , however, which are emitted before a branch misprediction is resolved. As a result, UDP can almost perfectly
eliminate unuseful prefetches while leveraging a deep FTQ for
good timeliness. UDP provides an IPC uplift of up to 16.1%
and of 3.6% in average. In summary, we make the following
1 Merge point: The instruction after which two control-flow paths merge,
for instance, the first instruction after an if{} else{} block

Fig. 2. Fetch Directed Instruction Prefetching. The decoupled frontend inserts
fetch-blocks at the tail while FDIP emits prefetches at the head. The backend
takes the instructions from the FTQ.

contributions:
• A detailed analysis of the state-of-the-art FDIP implementation revealing why its performance falls significantly short of a perfect icache
• UFTQ, a mechanism that dynamically adapts the FTQ
size based on workload characteristics
• UDP, a technique that prefetches only useful instructions
both on the on-path and off-path
• A comprehensive evaluation of UDP for 10 large instruction footprint applications showing an IPC performance
improvement of 3.6%.
UDP is built on top of an open-source Scarab [9], [10] simulator and incorporated into the open-source Scarab infrastructure [11]. Scarab+UDP is available at https://github.com/LitzLab/scarab and the tool is available at https://github.com/LitzLab/Scarab-infra.
II. BACKGROUND
Fetch Directed Instruction Prefetching (FDIP) [47] is a hardware prefetching technique that leverages the branch predictor
to prefetch instructions. The technique is based on the insight
that the branch predictor can advance instructions faster than
the backend. In particular, a decoupled frontend can process
one (or more) fetch blocks per cycle while the backend can
only execute a fixed number of instructions per cycle. A fetch
block is defined as a fixed-sized, aligned number of instruction
bytes. Modern architectures support fetch blocks of a size of
32 Bytes [28] and can look up all instructions of a block in the
(banked) BTB simultaneously, to extract control flow changing
instructions. For each branch within the block, the predictor
is consulted to determine whether the branch is taken or nottaken. A taken branch terminates the fetch block and finishes
processing of said block in the given cycle. The decoupled
front end then inserts the start and end address of the fetch
block into a data structure referred to as the fetch target queue
(FTQ).
The FTQ is utilized for two purposes. First, it informs the
instruction fetch engine and decoder about block boundaries
so that it can retrieve sequential instructions from the icache
until terminated by a taken branch. Second, the FTQ enables
FDIP to reduce icache misses.
FDIP scans the FTQ to look up fetch-blocks in the icache
before the icache will access them. FDIP can run ahead of

1189

