Suppressing Correlated Noise in Quantum Computers via Context-Aware Compiling
Alireza Seif,1 Haoran Liao,2 Vinay Tripathi,3 Kevin Krsulich,1
Moein Malekakhlagh,1 Mirko Amico,1 Petar Jurcevic,1 and Ali Javadi-Abhari1
1

arXiv:2403.06852v2 [quant-ph] 26 Aug 2024

IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
2
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3
Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA
Coherent errors, and especially those that occur in correlation among a set of qubits, are detrimental for large-scale quantum computing. Correlations in noise can occur as a result of spatial
and temporal configurations of instructions executing on the quantum processor. In this paper, we
perform a detailed experimental characterization of many of these error sources, and theoretically
connect them to the physics of superconducting qubits and gate operations. Equipped with this
knowledge, we devise compiler strategies to suppress these errors using dynamical decoupling or
error compensation into the rest of the circuit. Importantly, these strategies are successful when the
context at each layer of computation is taken into account: how qubits are connected, what crosstalk
terms exist on the device, and what gates or idle periods occur in that layer. Our context-aware
compiler thus suppresses some dominant sources of error, making further error mitigation or error
correction substantially less expensive. For example, our experiments show an increase of 18.5% in
layer fidelity for a candidate 10-qubit circuit layer compared to context-unaware suppression. Owing
to the exponential nature of error mitigation, these improvements due to error suppression translate
to several orders of magnitude reduction of sampling overhead for a circuit consisting of a moderate
number of layers.

I.

INTRODUCTION

As quantum computers scale up, it becomes crucial to
characterize, suppress, mitigate, and ultimately correct
errors in the computation. Error suppression via better
calibration or compilation is often the first line of defense, as it can prevent errors from surfacing with only
small, constant overhead [1–3]. On the other hand, error mitigation has shown great success in removing errors
from large computations, but involves additional circuit
executions to improve the results, effectively trading (exponential) sample complexity for accuracy [4–6]. Finally,
error correction can robustly remove errors with polynomial or even constant circuit overhead, but this overhead
can be large [7, 8]. In both error mitigation and correction, the overhead can be significantly reduced if error
suppression is deployed well.
Among the variety of possible errors, coherent quantum noise can harm computation quadratically more
than incoherent (stochastic) errors. Therefore, their accurate characterization and suppression has become an
important goal [9–11]. Worse, some of these errors exhibit correlations across several qubits, thus spreading
errors faster and making them particularly challenging
to handle in error correction protocols [12, 13]. In this
paper, we present methods and experimental results for
suppressing a wide range of correlated coherent errors,
using the context of the hardware and the circuits that
run on it. Throughout, we present a comprehensive characterization of several sources of errors, and discuss different strategies that suit each one.
In the near-term, the intersection of error suppression
and error mitigation deserves a special attention. Error
mitigation techniques typically use additional samples of
the circuit and post-processing to improve the accuracy

of the results. In leading protocols such as Probabilistic
Error Cancellation (PEC) [4, 5] and Probabilistic Error
Amplification (PEA) [14], circuits are arranged in layers
of gates that are subsequently twirled [15–20] by inserting random Pauli gates between them without changing
the overall logic of the circuit. This twirling simplifies
the structure of the noise in circuit layers and makes it
amenable to error mitigation. The cost of error mitigation with PEC, as determined by its sampling overhead,
grows exponentially with circuit size, and the base of the
exponential is determined by the overall noise in the circuit. Therefore, even modest improvements in the errors
can have significant impact on the total runtime of an
error mitigated computation.
The randomization introduced by twirling already suppresses the propagation of coherent errors in the circuit
by converting those error channels to incoherent ones.
However, at the same time the removal of the structure
in the noise introduces challenges to its suppression. For
instance, a known coherent error that could have been
compensated by applying its inverse, can no longer be
removed as simply. Given the extreme impact of reduced
error rates on the sampling overhead, it is therefore crucial to suppress the known coherent errors in the circuit
before twirling and converting those errors to incoherent
ones.
An effective method to suppress coherent and temporally correlated single-qubit noise in circuits is Dynamical Decoupling (DD) [21–26]. However, going beyond
the single-qubit case, and effectively inserting DD in a
quantum circuit at scale is a challenging task. On one
hand, the compiler must be aware of different crosstalk
terms in the device Hamiltonian, noise spectrums on the
qubits, and the physical gate calibrations used. On the
other hand, the temporal and spatial structure of the

2
circuit being executed plays an important role in determining the best sequence of DD gates to use. Our
first contribution is an extensive characterization of correlated errors present in IBM quantum hardware, and a
Context-Aware Dynamical Decoupling (CA-DD) framework that can dress arbitrary circuits with appropriate DD sequences. Our compiler works by coloring the
qubits’ interaction graph at each layer of the circuit based
on the the contents of that layer and the underlying hardware.
Dynamical decoupling is very effective at suppressing known sources of crosstalk and temporally correlated
noise. However, there are cases where it is difficult or
undesirable to use DD. This could be the case, for example, when qubits are already actively participating in
a gate and thus DD gates cannot be applied to them.
Furthermore, gates used in DD sequences are themselves
non-ideal and can introduce systematic errors or even
crosstalk. Lastly, it may be challenging to fulfill the
precise timing requirements of DD by the device controller, especially in cases of classical measurement and
feed-forward operation, causing non-deterministic timing
between some qubits while other qubits are idle.
To address this, we introduce a second compiler strategy termed Context-Aware Error Compensation (CAEC) that compiles coherent errors directly into quantum
algorithms, thus compensating for them without introducing extra overhead. The key insight enabling this
is the fact that some errors are very well-characterized
and remain constant over long periods of time, such as
always-on ZZ and Stark shift errors. This approach integrates well with the layered circuit structure of error
mitigation protocols, where it is simple to categorize error patterns and find nearby gates that can be used for
their compensation. Additionally, we show how simple
dynamical decoupling sequences in conjunction with our
error compensation method can achieve the performance
of more complicated DD sequences.
We apply our compilation strategies to several quantum applications, including the simulation of 1-D Ising
chain and a Heisenberg ring, the generic task of estimating circuit layer fidelity [27], and circuits with intermediate measurements and feedforward. In all cases, we
demonstrate a reduction of errors, and consequently a
decrease in error mitigation overhead. This presents a
promising avenue for squeezing more performance from
quantum computers, with almost no additional overhead.

II.
A.

SETUP

Crosstalk and coherent errors in a quantum
circuit

Quantum crosstalk in a quantum processor refers to
an intended quantum operation on a subset of qubits
having unintended action on one or more qubits [28, 29].
The nature and strength of crosstalk depends on the spe-

cific implementation of the quantum information processing device. Although our experiments are run on fixedfrequency cross-resonance (CR) processors [25], the errors we address are relevant to other platforms. Broadly
speaking, the crosstalk can be generated during singleand two-qubit gates, state-preparation and measurement, and idle times. Here, we focus on certain crosstalkinduced single- and two-qubit coherent errors.
A prevalent two-qubit crosstalk error in superconducting architectures is the always-on ZZ interaction. This
can originate from coupling to higher levels of the (transmon) qubits [30–32] and is typically more problematic for
fixed-frequency architectures. The Hamiltonian describing this error on a pair of qubits is
H11 =

ν
(−I ⊗ Z − Z ⊗ I + Z ⊗ Z),
2

(1)

where ν is the strength of the coupling that varies from
pair to pair. This Hamiltonian indicates that qubits accumulate a phase when they are both in the excited state
|1⟩. Therefore, nearest-neighboring qubits experience an
error of the form
U11 = Rzz (θ) · [Rz (−θ) ⊗ Rz (−θ)],

(2)

where θ = ντ , when they are idle for time τ .
When applying a gate, qubits are driven, which alters
this error. As we show, a major error that affects the
spectator qubits, i.e., qubits in the vicinity of the qubits
that the gate acts on, is a coherent Z rotations generated
by
Hs =

ν
Z,
2

(3)

which leads to error Rz (θ).
In addition to these major sources of errors, spectators
to both single-qubit or two-qubit gates can experience
an AC Stark shift (Z error) and potentially off-resonant
X/Y -error [33] on the spectator [34]. More generally,
the degree by which the qubits are susceptible to various forms of crosstalk depends on proximity to frequency
collisions [32, 35–37], and can be improved with postfabrication laser annealing technique for fixed-frequency
setups [35, 36].
Quantum crosstalk errors emerge in other quantum
computing platforms as well. For example, in trapped
ions, the crosstalk between the spectator qubits and the
target in an application of a Mølmer-Sørensen gate [38] is
a major source of error [39]. In these systems, crosstalk
occurs due to unwanted illumination of neighboring ions
by laser during the gate operations. This leads to coherent errors of type XX and XY , which were recently addressed and suppressed using dynamical decoupling techniques in Ref. [39].
At the software level, these errors can be potentially
suppressed after the compilation and scheduling of the
circuit using dynamical decoupling (DD) (see e.g. [24])
or the novel error compensation (EC) techniques that we

