2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00041

2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

Designing Cloud Servers for Lower Carbon
Jaylen Wang∗ , Daniel S. Berger†,‡ , Fiodar Kazhamiaka† , Celine Irvene† , Chaojie Zhang† , Esha Choukse† ,
Kali Frost† , Rodrigo Fonseca† , Brijesh Warrier† , Chetan Bansal† , Jonathan Stern† , Ricardo Bianchini† ,
Akshitha Sriraman∗
∗ Carnegie Mellon University † Microsoft ‡ University of Washington

Abstract—To mitigate climate change, we must reduce carbon
emissions from hyperscale cloud computing. We ﬁnd that cloud
compute servers cause the majority of emissions in a generalpurpose cloud. Thus, we motivate designing carbon-efﬁcient
compute server SKUs, or GreenSKUs, using recently-available lowcarbon server components. To this end, we design and build three
GreenSKUs using low-carbon components, such as energy-efﬁcient
CPUs, reused old DRAM via CXL, and reused old SSDs.
We detail several challenges that limit GreenSKUs’ carbon
savings at scale and may prevent their adoption by cloud providers.
To address these challenges, we develop a novel methodology and
associated framework, GSF (GreenSKU Framework), that enables
a cloud provider to systematically evaluate a GreenSKU’s carbon
savings at scale. We implement GSF within Microsoft Azure’s
production constraints to evaluate our three GreenSKUs’ carbon
savings. Using GSF, we show that our most carbon-efﬁcient
GreenSKU reduces emissions per core by 28% compared to
currently-deployed cloud servers. When designing GreenSKUs to
meet applications’ performance requirements, we reduce emissions
by 15%. When incorporating overall data center overheads, our
GreenSKU reduces Azure’s net cloud emissions by 8%.

solution. Server SKU design is the process by which existing
hardware components are selected and composed into servers.
Typically, cloud providers design compute server SKUs to meet
performance and cost goals. To reduce emissions, we introduce
a new way of designing carbon-efﬁcient compute server SKUs,
or “GreenSKUs,” that trade off performance for lower carbon.
We ﬁnd that designing and deploying carbon-efﬁcient GreenSKUs is promising for four reasons. First, we show that compute
servers cause the majority of cloud emissions, and their design
directly impacts both embodied and operational emissions.
Indeed, with a ∼six-year lifetime for cloud servers [88],
design choices made in the next two years directly affect
the industry’s 2030 carbon goals. Second, it is challenging for
cloud providers to rely on manufacturing’s decarbonization,
as many manufacturers have decarbonization targets that lag
behind cloud providers’ targets by over a decade [88]. Third,
as we will show, cloud servers are often underutilized [50],
making a case for designing servers that right-size performance
to save emissions. Fourth, GreenSKU design and deployment
is more feasible today due to the availability of carbon-efﬁcient
commodity server components, e.g., energy-efﬁcient cores [4].
Due to GreenSKUs’ promise, we design and build three
GreenSKUs using low-carbon components that mitigate cloud
compute servers’ key sources of operational and embodied
emissions. Our GreenSKUs incrementally incorporate three
low-carbon components: energy-efﬁcient high-thread-count
CPUs [4], reuse of old DRAM with Compute Express Link
(CXL) [103], and reuse of old Solid State Drives (SSDs).
While GreenSKUs promise carbon savings, we demonstrate
several challenges that limit cloud providers from practically
deploying them at scale. First, we ﬁnd that a GreenSKU may
compromise performance. For example, a GreenSKU built with
many energy-efﬁcient, i.e., efﬁcient, cores [4] typically has
lower single-thread performance. In practice, only some cloud
applications, e.g., those not bound by single-thread performance,
will run on such a GreenSKU. Thus, it is challenging to
design GreenSKUs while effectively navigating their emissions
vs. performance tradeoff, to justify deploying them at scale.
Second, a GreenSKU’s operational and embodied emissions
can have complex tradeoffs. For example, reusing an older
server component can reduce embodied emissions, but may
increase operational emissions due to the component’s poor
energy efﬁciency [64]. Third, each new SKU adds operational
complexity and cost. Thus, while cloud applications are highly
diverse, cloud providers must limit how many SKU types

I. I NTRODUCTION
To mitigate climate change, we must reduce carbon emissions
from Information and Communication Technology (ICT), which
can cause 20% of global carbon emissions by 2030 [76]. Historically, ICT’s emissions reduced when sharing compute resources
using cloud computing [36]. However, today, projections show
that signiﬁcant emissions arise from cloud computing itself,
due to its massive growth [73], [76]. Thus, it is now critical to
reduce cloud computing’s emissions [38], [47]. Indeed, major
cloud providers have set aggressive decarbonization deadlines,
targeting signiﬁcant emissions reductions by 2030 [10], [27].
To reduce ICT’s emissions from cloud computing, we must
reduce the cloud’s operational emissions (e.g., from producing
electricity to run data centers) and embodied emissions (e.g.,
from semiconductor fabs that make server components) [65].
Historically, cloud computing’s operational emissions exceeded
its embodied emissions. To reduce operational emissions,
hyperscale cloud providers improve energy efﬁciency [45], [52],
[62], [79], [96], [118], [132], [134] and use more renewable
energy [35], [48], [65]. Today, the decrease in operational
emissions due to such solutions has caused embodied emissions
to account for 50%–82% of cloud emissions [65], [88]. Thus,
it is crucial to reduce both emission types.
To reduce cloud computing’s operational and embodied
emissions, we identify designing carbon-efﬁcient cloud compute server Stock Keeping Units (SKUs) as a promising

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00041

452

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

public cloud like Azure, applications typically run within
Virtual Machines (VMs) on compute servers [66]. While there
are many compute server types, the most common types today
use a general-purpose x86 or ARM CPU, signiﬁcant DDR5
memory capacity, a few NVMe SSDs, and a Network Interface
Card (NIC). Additionally, storage services, such as object stores,
are hosted on dedicated storage servers that contain arrays of
hard disks, with fewer computational resources.
We focus on reducing emissions for general-purpose cloud
compute servers that form a large portion of Azure’s global
ﬂeet and carbon emissions. Although we do not focus on
heterogeneous compute, our work may be used to develop
GreenSKUs for heterogeneous platforms in future work.
In this section, we ﬁrst detail a breakdown of a cloud’s overall
emissions. We then discuss how cloud servers are designed
and utilized today. Finally, we introduce key design goals for
low-carbon compute servers, i.e., GreenSKUs.
Carbon Emission Breakdown [%]

they deploy. We refer to these factors (e.g., performance) that
impact whether a GreenSKU can practically be deployed at
scale, as the “adoption” of the GreenSKU. It is critical and
challenging for cloud providers to identify which GreenSKU
designs are adoptable, i.e., able to save carbon while meeting
diverse applications’ deployment requirements at scale.
To address these challenges, we develop a novel methodology
and framework, GSF, to enable cloud providers to evaluate a
GreenSKU’s carbon savings in the cloud. GSF systematically
considers the major factors that inﬂuence a GreenSKU’s
beneﬁts at scale. GSF’s components model each major factor,
such as modeling a GreenSKU’s at-scale impact on carbon,
performance, maintenance, server adoption, resource allocation,
and server fragmentation. GSF abstracts these components’
relationships from how a cloud provider implements each
component, enabling a cloud provider to ﬂexibly use GSF in
their cloud to estimate a GreenSKU’s net carbon savings.
We implement GSF within Microsoft Azure’s production
constraints to evaluate our three GreenSKUs’ carbon savings at
scale. Our carbon model reﬂects Azure’s data center design. We
study representative applications in Azure to identify those that
run effectively on our GreenSKUs. We also simulate workload
packing on our GreenSKUs under production constraints.
Using our GSF implementation, we show that our GreenSKUs reduce carbon emissions per core by 28% compared to
currently-deployed cloud servers at Azure. When deploying
GreenSKUs in a way that meets applications’ performance
goals, we reduce emissions by 15%. Finally, when incorporating
overall data center overheads, our GreenSKUs reduce net cloud
emissions by 8%, which is a signiﬁcant reduction at scale.
In summary, we contribute:
• A demonstration of the opportunity to signiﬁcantly reduce
cloud emissions by designing and deploying carbonefﬁcient server hardware, i.e., GreenSKUs, at scale.
• The development of three new GreenSKU prototypes with
carbon-efﬁcient server components.
• A study of the challenges that limit GreenSKUs’ adoption
and carbon savings at scale.
1
• A novel methodology and associated framework, GSF ,
that helps cloud providers to systematically evaluate a
GreenSKU’s carbon savings at scale.
• An evaluation of our GreenSKUs by using GSF within
a leading cloud provider’s production constraints, to
demonstrate our GreenSKUs’ carbon savings.
We motivate GreenSKUs in §II and describe our GreenSKU
prototypes in §III. We detail GSF in §IV and its implementation
in §V. We use GSF to evaluate our GreenSKUs in §VI. We
discuss GreenSKUs’ practicality in §VII, open questions in
§VIII, and related work in §IX. We conclude in §X.

100

Other

Operational Emissions
Network

Storage

75

100

CPU

Embodied Emissions
Other

CPU

Network

DRAM

75

Storage
DRAM

50

IT

Compute
Servers

25

50

IT
SSDs

SSDs
NICs

25

Compute
Servers

Other
0

Across
Data Center

Within
IT

Within
Compute

NICs
Other

0

Across
Data Center

Within
IT

Within
Compute

Fig. 1. Carbon breakdown of general-purpose data centers at Azure.

Sources of data center carbon emissions. To understand
GreenSKU design opportunities, we analyze how different
server types and their hardware components contribute to a
general-purpose cloud’s emissions. Similar to prior work [64],
[65], we adopt the greenhouse gas protocol’s deﬁnition of
emissions from Scope 1 (i.e., direct emissions), Scope 2
(i.e., indirect emissions from consuming power), and Scope 3
(i.e., indirect emissions from manufacturing and transporting
procured products like servers). We refer to Scope 1 emissions
as direct emissions, Scope 2 emissions as operational emissions,
and Scope 3 emissions as embodied emissions, matching prior
work’s terminology [64], [65], [115]. With these deﬁnitions,
we use our carbon model (detailed later in §IV and §V) to
estimate a cloud data center’s carbon emissions breakdown.
We estimate operational emissions using power traces from
Azure. To calculate embodied emissions, we estimate raw
materials from vendor manifests, measure devices’ silicon
area, and use averaged emissions for manufacturing processes
reported in industry datasets such as IMEC [21] and Makersite [25]. Our embodied emission estimation counts emissions
once per component across the supply chain, making it directly
comparable to operational emissions. The sum of all three
emission types, i.e., direct, operational, and embodied, deﬁnes
a cloud’s total carbon emissions.
We ﬁnd that direct emissions are negligible, as they mainly
arise from backup diesel generators [78]. Thus, we only
study operational and embodied emissions. The relative weight

II. O PPORTUNITIES AND C HALLENGES WITH D ESIGNING
G REEN SKU S
Cloud platforms offer diverse services including infrastructure, platform, and software as a service. In a general-purpose
1We open-source an implementation of GSF’s carbon model [18], [123],
which is available at https://github.com/Azure/AzurePublicDataset

453
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on January 08,2026 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

