Derm: SLA-aware Resource Management for
Highly Dynamic Microservices
Liao Chen∗∥ , Shutian Luo†∥ , Chenyu Lin∗ , Zizhao Mo∗ , Huanle Xu∗¶ , Kejiang Ye‡ , and Chengzhong Xu∗¶
∗ University of Macau, Email: yc27428, mc14889, yc17461, huanlexu, czxu@um.edu.mo
† Yale University, Email: shutian.luo@yale.edu
‡ Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Email: kj.ye@siat.ac.cn

Request 1
Request 2
Request 3
...
Request n

User
Graph n

Graph 1
Preserve-service

Graph 2

Graph 3

Travel2-service

...
Contacts-service

...

...

Abstract—Ensuring efficient resource allocation while providing service level agreement (SLA) guarantees for end-to-end
(E2E) latency is crucial for microservice applications. Although
existing studies have made significant contributions towards
achieving this objective, they primarily concentrate on static
graphs. However, microservice graphs are inherently dynamic
during runtime in production environments, necessitating more
effective and scalable resource management solutions.
In this paper, we present Derm, a new resource management
system designed for microservice applications with highly dynamic graphs. Our principal finding is that prioritizing different
microservice graphs can lead to a substantial reduction in
resource allocation. To take advantage of this opportunity, we
develop three main components. The first is a performance model
that describes uncertainties of microservice latency through a
conditional exponential distribution. The second is a probabilistic
quantification of the dynamics of microservice graphs. The third
is an optimization method for adjusting the resource allocation of
microservices to minimize resource usage. We evaluate Derm in
our cluster using real microservice benchmarks and production
traces. The results highlight that Derm reduces the resource
usage by 68.4% and lowers SLA violation probability by 6.7×,
compared to existing approaches.

Travel-service
Ticketinfo-service

...
...

Order-other-service

Order-service

Basic-service
...
...

Fig. 1: Dynamic microservice graphs formed by the same
TrainTicket application [45]. Microservices of diverse colors
belong to distinct graphs.
microservices becomes extremely difficult. This complexity
is compounded when the runtime of individual microservices
fluctuates dramatically. Second, microservice graphs are highly
dynamic at runtime. Fig. 1 illustrates that a same application
can generate diverse graphs, comprising entirely different
microservices, depending on the specific requests it handles.
Consequently, the E2E latency experienced by microservice
applications varies significantly, further complicating global
resource management.
Existing works have made substantial efforts to optimize
resource allocation for microservice applications via deep
learning or explicit modeling [5], [7], [17], [22], [29], [30],
[42], [43]. In particular, deep learning methods rely on neural
networks to directly predict the E2E latency in relation to
the resource configuration within a specified microservice
graph [29], [30], [42]. However, these methods need to
evaluate many potential configurations to find the optimal
resource allocation, which is not scalable for handling large
microservice graphs in production environments [22]. By contrast, those modeling solutions typically quantify E2E latencies
using deterministic approaches, which cannot accommodate
the high degree of uncertainty in microservice latencies [7],
[17], [22]. Consequently, they tend to make under-estimations
and cause SLA violations.
Moreover, existing works do not investigate highly dynamic
microservice graphs. However, trace analysis from Alibaba
clusters shows that more than 50% of applications exhibit more

I. I NTRODUCTION
The microservice architecture, which has gained popularity
in cloud data centers [4], [10], [11], is gradually replacing
traditional monolithic frameworks for deploying new applications. Under such architecture, different components of an application are decoupled into a set of light-weight and looselycoupled microservices for high scalability and flexibility [1],
[13], [19], [35]–[37], [44]. Thanks to the fine granularity,
resource orchestration platforms such as Kubernetes [18] can
independently scale resources for each microservice when resource bottlenecks occur, rather than for the entire application,
to improve resource efficiency.
For microservice applications, it is important to guarantee
the tail end-to-end (E2E) latency meet service level agreement (SLA) requirement while minimizing resource provisioning [42]. However, achieving this goal is quite challenging
due to two fundamental issues. First, the microservice graph
formed by an application request may involve hundreds of
microservices with complex dependencies [20]. Globally coordinating resource allocation among such a large scale of
∥ Co-first authors, both authors contribute equally to this work.
¶ Huanle Xu and Chengzhong Xu are corresponding authors.

1

CDF

than two types of microservice graphs [20]. Although dynamic
graphs pose challenges for guaranteeing E2E latency, they
also bring good opportunities to improve resource efficiency
by letting the latency of requests with different graphs meet
SLA with non-uniform probabilities. As demonstrated in § II,
by carefully prioritizing different graphs within the same
application, the overall resource allocation can be saved by
up to 20%. Therefore, it is critical to explore the difference
between dynamic microservice graphs to further maximize
resource efficiency.
In this paper, we introduce Derm, a new resource management system primarily for dynamic microservice applications.
Motivated by the potential of graph dynamics to enhance
resource management efficiency, Derm integrates three crucial
elements. First, to model uncertainty, Derm characterizes microservice latency through an exponential distribution, which
is a conditional probability distribution w.r.t. microservice
load. This probabilistic modeling enables Derm to explicitly quantify the E2E latency of dynamic graphs. Second,
Derm learns microservice graphs based on historical traces
to each graph. This learning process is characterized by two
key aspects: it considers both the application load and the
distribution of user request arguments. Third, Derm formulates
an optimization problem for resource allocation based on
microservice latency uncertainties and probabilistic execution
of microservice graphs. In the formulation, application requests for the complex microservice graph consisting of many
microservices with high latency uncertainty need to meet the
SLA requirement with a low probability to save resources.
The principle behind this is that when increasing resource
provisioning, the marginal improvement in E2E latency of
complex graphs is less significant than that of simple graphs.
In order to make the system scalable, we have identified
crucial insights that address the optimization problem, which
reduces the number of variables to be solved by half. Based on
this, we have incorporated a computationally efficient search
method into Derm, effectively managing extensive microservice graphs. In addition, when faced with changes in load, the
system requires only a linear scaling of containers, eliminating
the need for frequent resolving optimization problems.
We build a prototype of Derm on top of Kubernetes [18].
Our evaluation of Derm includes real deployments in our
private cluster using two benchmarks, DeathStarBench [13]
and Train Ticket [45], as well as large-scale trace-driven simulations based on Alibaba traces [20]. The results demonstrate
that Derm achieves high prediction accuracy for both individual microservice latency and tail E2E latency, surpassing 85%.
Additionally, the graph prediction accuracy can reach as high
as 93%. Furthermore, experimental results highlight that Derm
can reduce the number of allocated containers by up to 68.4%
and lower SLA violation probability by 6.7×, compared to
the state-of-the-art approaches. In summary, we have made
the following contributions in this paper:
• Comprehensive analysis of dynamic graphs. We have
identified the main factors that lead to the dynamics of
microservice graphs, which include application load and

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0 0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Number of Microservice Graphs Formed by One Application

Fig. 2: Distribution of the number of microservice graphs
within each application in Alibaba traces.
the distribution of requests arguments. In the meanwhile,
we show that such dynamics can greatly affect resource
allocation for microservice applications.
• Efficient resource management for microservice applications. Derm is the first system to optimize resource
allocation for microservice applications with highly dynamic dependencies. In achieving this, Derm explicitly
models latency uncertainty and graph dynamics.
• Scalable System. We provide a prototype implementation
of Derm on top of Kubernetes [18], a widely-used container orchestration system. Derm is scalable to handle
complex graphs in production environments.
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
A. Dynamic Microservice Graphs
A production cluster often deploys various applications, and
each application provides a variety of different applications
to serve user requests [21]. An application typically contains
multiple microservices running in hundreds of containers (with
the same configuration) [20]. Notably, in order to handle user
requests effectively, each container spawns multiple threads
for processing purposes. A user request is typically sent to
an entering microservice, e.g., Nginx, which then triggers a
set of invocations (calls) between multiple microservices in
a sequential or parallel manner. These calls along with their
microservices form a microservice graph. The E2E latency of
a request is the duration from the user sending a request to it
receiving the reply.
Under the microservice architecture, each application is
expected to provide multiple functionalities. For instance, in
Alibaba clusters, the online shopping application needs to
give discounts to users from time to time. As a result of
these diverse functionalities, the execution environment of
microservices varies significantly when handling different user
requests, leading to dynamic microservice graphs. The illustration in Fig. 1 demonstrates how various requests originating
from the same application can generate different microservice
graphs during runtime. To provide a comprehensive overview,
we also estimate the number of distinct microservice graphs
formed by all applications in Alibaba clusters [20]. As depicted in Fig. 2, over 50% of applications contain at least two
types of graphs. Moreover, approximately 10% of applications
can form five distinct graphs, and these applications are
typically more popular than others.

2

