FEATHER: A Reconfigurable Accelerator with Data
Reordering Support for Low-Cost On-Chip Dataflow Switching
Jianming Tong

Anirudh Itagi

Prasanth Chatarasi

Tushar Krishna

Input Activations (iActs)
Sliding Window

Sliding Window Result Output Activations (oActs)

Kernel 1 Kernel 2 Kernel M

Shape

Layout

#Line

DRAM
/HBM

der

Or

sm
leli
ral

Pa

Level-0 Tile
Level-1 Tile
Virtual Grouping of PEs Data Organization
for nt in [0,N,1): Tile for n in [0,1,1):
Line Size
for mt in [0,M,16):
for x in [0,2,1):
PE PE PE PE
C0H0W0:7
C0H1W0:7
for ct in [0,C,64):
for y in [0,2,1):
PE PE PE PE
C0H2W0:7
for xt in [0,R,2):
for r in [0,2,1):
C0H3W0:7
PE PE PE PE
for yt in [0,Q,2):
for s in [0,2,1):
Bank 0 1 2
for rt in [0,R,2):
parfor m in [0,16,4):
PE PE PE PE
Memory
Hierarchy
for st in [0,Q,2):
parfor c in [0,64,4):

der

Abstract—The inference of ML models composed of diverse
structures, types, and sizes boils down to the execution of different
dataflows (i.e. different tiling, ordering, parallelism, and shapes).
Using the optimal dataflow for every layer of workload can reduce
latency by up to two orders of magnitude over a suboptimal
dataflow. Unfortunately, reconfiguring hardware for different
dataflows involves on-chip data layout reordering and datapath
reconfigurations, leading to non-trivial overhead that hinders
ML accelerators from exploiting different dataflows, resulting in
suboptimal performance. To address this challenge, we propose
FEATHER, an innovative accelerator that leverages a novel spatial
array termed NEST and a novel multi-stage reduction network
called BIRRD for performing flexible data reduction with layout
reordering under the hood, enabling seamless switching between
optimal dataflows with negligible latency and resources overhead.
For systematically evaluating the performance interaction between
dataflows and layouts, we enhance Timeloop, a state-of-theart dataflow cost modeling and search framework, with layout
assessment capabilities, and term it as Layoutloop. We model
FEATHER into Layoutloop and also deploy FEATHER end-to-end
on the edge ZCU104 FPGA. FEATHER delivers 1.27 ∼ 2.89×
inference latency speedup and 1.3 ∼ 6.43× energy efficiency
improvement compared to various SoTAs like NVDLA, SIGMA
and Eyeriss under ResNet-50 and MobiletNet-V3 in Layoutloop.
On practical FPGA devices, FEATHER achieves 2.65/3.91×
higher throughput than Xilinx DPU/Gemmini. Remarkably, such
performance and energy efficiency enhancements come at only
6% area over a fixed-dataflow Eyeriss-like accelerator. Our code
is released at https://github.com/maeri-project/FEATHER.
Index Terms—Reconfigurable Accelerator, Dataflow, Layout

Or

arXiv:2405.13170v1 [cs.AR] 21 May 2024

Georgia Institute of Technology Georgia Institute of Technology
IBM Research
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Yorktown Heights, USA
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
jianming.tong@gatech.edu
aitagi7@gatech.edu
prasanth@ibm.com
tushar@ece.gatech.edu

Fig. 1: Terminology of convolution workload and dataflow

Changing dataflows on accelerators requires (a) reconfiguring
datapaths in computation, distribution, and reduction networks,
and (b) modifying data layout in on-chip buffers. Almost all
prior works have focused on the first aspect, and several clever
interconnect topologies for data distribution and reduction have
been proposed that activate subset of paths at runtime through
reconfiguration depending on the dataflow being run [42], [44].
However, data layout in the on-chip buffer is a critical and
often overlooked in past work.
In this work, we demonstrate that the high performance of
dataflows is unachievable in practice without layout reordering
capability. This is because, without a suitable data layout, the
required data may be located in the same SRAM banks and
compete at the same SRAM reading ports. Such bank conflict
slows down the delivery of data to computation engines, leading
to stalling and computation underutilization. Overlooking layout
I. I NTRODUCTION
reordering thus introduces a significant 128× performance gap
The field of Machine Learning (ML), specifically Deep between theory and practice as quantified in Fig. 2. We discuss
Neural Networks (DNNs) is pervasive today across image this with more depth in §II.
Unfortunately, layout reordering comes with severe latency
classification [12], [40], object detection [3], [37], text summarization [20] and sentiment analysis [25]. Such a plethora and energy overheads. Off-chip layout reordering requires
of ML models introduces great diversity in structure (serial or back-and-forth data movement between off-chip DRAM/HBM
parallel layers connectivity), layer types (depth-width, point- and computation, while on-chip layout reordering requires
width, dilation convolutions, or even a fusion of them), and additional intermediate storage and extra latency in the critical
sizes (number of channels, kernels, height, and width) [7], [49]. path. In fact, these costs can outweigh the benefits of switching
The mechanism for orchestrating a DNN layer over the dataflows, leading existing ML accelerators to compromise
accelerator’s on-chip compute and memory resources is called settling on a single dataflow (e.g., Xilinx DPU, Gemmini,
dataflow. It can be precisely defined by transformations of NVDLA, Eyeriss in Table I) that provides good average
the loop nest, as shown in Fig. 1. Several prior works [33], utilization across all layers, but sub-optimal performance.
[41] have demonstrated that dataflows can lead to significant
To unleash optimal performance, we propose a novel acceldifferences in compute utilization and up to two orders erator FEATHER, Flexible Engine for Acceleration of Tensors
of magnitude variance in latency and energy, and thereby with Hardware Element for Reordering, which includes a novel
motivated the need to support per-layer dataflow flexibility.
reconfigurable reduction network called Butterfly Interconnect

TABLE I: Feature comparison: how FEATHER resolves challenges of prior works without on-chip layout reordering.
Dataflow Switching
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓

Layout Reorder
no reorder
no reorder
no reorder
off-chip
off-chip

Challenge
underutilization from fixed parallelism
linear reduction
load imbalance across PE
high latency of moving data off-chip
long wires of reduction network

23
21

1~8X

impact of layout
theory practice gap

output-stationary dataflow + fixed layout, error bar shows impact of diff layout (Fixed dataflow-layout)
searched dataflow w/o layout consideration (theoretical best)
evaluate theoretical best dataflow under various layouts, error bar shows impact of diff layouts (practice)
flexible dataflow with data layout switching support (FEATHER, this work)
2~64X
4~128X
2~60X
5
2
6~60X
6~44X
2~23X
4~13X
impact of dataflows

Normalized Latency

Work
NVDLA [39]
Xilinx DPU [51], Gemmini [21]
SIMBA [47], Eyeriss [13]
Eyeriss v2 [15], SARA [44]
MAERI [35], SIGMA [42]

FEATHER solution (key component)
flexible dataflows (NEST)
parallel logarithmic reduction (BIRRD)
pick load-balance dataflows (NEST)
on-chip reordering with latency hidden (BIRRD)
small standalone reduction network (BIRRD)

TABLE II: On-chip memory terminology
Term
Buffer
Bank
Line/Row
Port

Meaning
A logical 2D on-chip memory (num line × line size) stacking multiple
SRAM banks both vertically (num line) and horizontally (line size).
A physical 2D SRAM (entries × io) with address/data ports.
A buffer line (line size = accumulated IO of horizontal SRAM banks).
An input/output port, each bank has at most two ports in TSMC 28nm.

representation, and dataflow-layout co-search. We call this new
framework Layoutloop (§V) and use it for our evaluations.
•We
implement and deploy FEATHER, end-to-end, on an edge
Fig. 2: Latency evaluation of dataflows on 16×16 PE array with
ZCU
104 FPGA device and also model it using Layoutloop.
various layouts (error bar shows layout impacts, less latency
FEATHER
achieves 1.27 ∼ 2.89× inference latency speedup
is better). The best flexible dataflow (green bar) theoretically
and
1.3
∼
6.43×
energy efficiency improvement compared to
reduces overall latency of fixed dataflow-layout (blue bar) by
various
SoTAs
across
multiple DNN models, and 2.65×/3.91×
63.3%. However, ignoring the impact of layout considerations
more
throughput
than
Xilinx
DPU/Gemmini on real FPGAs. On
in theoretical dataflows results in up to a 128× latency gap
average,
efficient
pairs
of
(dataflow,
layout) results in an energy
in practice (yellow bar). FEATHER eliminates the gap by cosavings
of
27%
to
33%
across
workloads
despite the energy
switching dataflow-layout (red bar).
costs of layout reordering. Remarkably, all enhancements come
at only 6% area over a fixed-dataflow Eyeriss-like accelerator.
for Reduction and Reordering in Dataflows (BIRRD). With
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
BIRRD, the latency of layout reordering is completely hidden
in data reduction, allowing data layout in on-chip storage to A. Dataflow Space in Convolution
be manipulated for the demand of optimal dataflow without
Fig. 1 depicts a convolution operation with seven dimensions
any latency costs. We call this approach as reordering in with various shapes. Dataflows can be represented as a nested
data reduction (RIR). Thus, FEATHER fully achieves the loop with four types of optimizations [24], [34].
theoretical performance of optimal dataflows without incurring
• (T)iling breaks down dimensions of iActs N,C, H,W into
bank conflicts. Furthermore, FEATHER also pioneers a new
smaller chunks, and enables executing workloads in tile
paradigm to co-switch both dataflows and data layouts at layer
granularity as on-chip storage is limited.
granularity, with minimal switching overheads. This ability to
• (O)rdering allows arbitrary loop reordering (aka “stationaraccommodate low-cost layout-dataflow co-switching is, as far
ity” [13]) to reuse more data since dimensions N, M,C, P, Q, R, S
as we know, unsupported by any existing accelerator.
do not come with loop-carried dependencies except reductionTo fully explore the potential of FEATHER, we also devel- dependencies over C, R, and S.
oped a tool that facilitates: (a) dataflow evaluation factoring in
• (P)arallelism allows for arbitrary parallelism over any didata layout, and (b) (layout, dataflow) co-exploration.
mensions as all dependencies are loop-independent, leading to
Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
different spatial reuse opportunities.
Layer 1

Layer 14 Layer 41 Full Model Layer 7
ResNet-50

Layer 25 Layer 40 Full Model
MobileNet-V3

•We demonstrate the interaction between dataflows and data • (S)hape defines the virtual grouping of the physical PE array.
layouts, motivating the need for data reordering support within
These dataflow flexibility (TOPS) [34] create an extremely
reconfigurable dataflow accelerators. We further categorize large dataflow design space with a complexity of O(1036 ) for
existing reordering patterns and implementations (§II).
a single convolution layer [27]. The choice of the dataflow
•We present a novel accelerator FEATHER with several novel affects both runtime performance (as it affects overall compute
features (§III). First, a neural engine with temporal local utilization) and energy efficiency (as it affects the number of
reduction and spatial forwarding, NEST, for dataflow flexibility. accesses across the memory hierarchy). Not surprisingly, no
Second, a multi-stage network called BIRRD enabling flexible single dataflow is generally optimal for all types of layers given
reductions from arbitrary groups of multiple inputs to multiple their diverse sizes and shapes [33], [41]. This can be seen by
results, at lower area overhead compared to prior works with comparing the first two bars (blue and green bars) in Fig. 2.
similar capabilities. Further, BIRRD supports Arbitrary reorder
via a novel technique RIR, that completely conceals data layout B. Data Layout in on-chip Storage
reordering latency behind reduction (§IV).
Various organizations of on-chip storage are logically a 2D
•We extend a state-of-the-art accelerator modeling framework buffer (Tab. II), where the width of each logical buffer row,
Timeloop [41] with support for physical on-chip storage, layout termed “line size”, represents bandwidth (max number of data

