Collision Prediction for Robotics Accelerators
Deval Shah

Tor M. Aamodt

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
devalshah@ece.ubc.ca

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
aamodt@ece.ubc.ca

I. I NTRODUCTION
Motion planning is a fundamental computing task in autonomous robotics. Given the current state of the environment
and an end goal, motion planning finds a feasible and safe
path to reach the goal. Motion planning is used to enable
object manipulation, full-body movement, and navigation (e.g.,
self-driving cars). The market for autonomous robots that can
aid humans is gaining increased attention in part due to rapid
progress in machine learning. For example, robots may enable
improvements in health-care and assistance to older adults.
In such settings these robots would be required to navigate
safely in cluttered environments while reacting to dynamic
obstacles in real-time [25], [32]. Collision detection is used
to ensure the safety of a robot’s movements and is the most

(a) Naive scheduling

Computation
(Normalized)

Abstract—Motion planning in dynamic environments is an
important task for autonomous robotics. Emerging approaches
employ neural networks that can learn by observing (e.g., human)
experts. Such motion planners react to the environment by
continually proposing candidate paths to reach a goal. Some
of these candidate paths may be unsafe–i.e., cause collisions.
Hence, proposed paths must be checked for safety using collision
detection. We observe that 25% − 41% of the resulting collision
detection queries can be eliminated if we can anticipate which
queries will return an unsafe result. We leverage this observation
to propose a mechanism, COORD, to predict whether a given
robot position (pose) along a proposed path will result in a
collision. By prioritizing the detailed evaluation of predicted
collisions, COORD enables quickly eliminating invalid paths
proposed by neural network and other sampling based motion
planners. COORD does this by exploiting the physical spatial
locality of different robot poses and using simple hashing and
saturating counters. We demonstrate the potential of collision
prediction on different computation platforms, including CPU,
GPU, and ASIC. We further propose a hardware collision
prediction unit (COPU), and integrate it with an existing collision
detection accelerator. This results in an average 17.2% − 32.1%
decrease in number of collision detection queries across different
motion planning algorithms and robots. When applied to a
state-of-the-art neural motion planner [41], COORD improves
performance/watt by 1.23× on average for motion planning
queries of varying difficulty levels. Further, we find that the
benefits of collision prediction grow as the compute complexity
of motion planning queries increases and provides 1.30× improvement in performance/watt in narrow passages and cluttered
environments.
Index Terms—Robotics, Hardware acceleration, Motion planning, Collision detection, Collision prediction

(b) Spatially-aware
scheduling

Naive Scheduling
Spatially-Aware (Baseline)

(c) Oracle scheduling

COORD Predictor

Oracle Predictor

100%
50%
0%

B1

B2

B3
B4
B5
Motion Planning Benchmarks

B6

(d)
Fig. 1: (a)-(c) represent different scheduling orders of robot linkenvironment collision detection queries (CDQs) for a motionenvironment collision check. Here, red-colored parts correspond to
CDQs executed, and gray-colored parts correspond to CDQs skipped
as a collision is found. (d) Comparison of the proposed collision predictor COORD with a naive sequential scheduler, baseline
Spatially-Aware Scheduler [43], and Oracle collision predictor. The
plot compares the reduction in collision detection computation across
a range of motion planning problems B1-B6.

time and energy-consuming part of several motion planning
approaches [5], [35], [39], [41].
Collision detection is a computationally intensive task that
must be performed in real-time to ensure safety and effectiveness of an autonomous robot. While prior work has explored
CPU and GPU-based acceleration of motion planning and
collision detection [2], [5], [9], [28], [39], [40], achieving
real-time operation in highly dynamic environments on such
hardware can be challenging. To improve robot productivity
specialized hardware has been proposed to accelerate collision
detection [3], [20], [31], [34], [43], [45], [48]. These works
have primarily focused on accelerating an individual collision
detection query. Shah et al. [43] proposed a scheduling policy
to reduce redundant computation by reordering collision detection queries. We find these approaches often perform more
collision detection queries than may be necessary especially
in cluttered environments.
Figure 1 illustrates the source of this inefficiency and hints
at how it may be overcome. In Figure 1a a motion of a robot
arm is divided up into n sample poses, P1 to Pn , checked by
running repeated Collision Detection Queries (CDQ) starting

from the beginning pose, P1 , sequentially towards the goal,
Pn . The red highlighted poses indicate evaluated CDQs. Shah
et al. [43] improve upon this “naive” ordering by employing
a spatially-aware ordering to reduce the number of evaluated
CDQs as shown in Figure 1b. In this paper we aim to further
reduce the number of CDQ evaluations by predicting which
of the sample points, if any, result in a collision. In the
ideal case, an unsafe motion would then require only a single
CDQ evaluation to rule out an unsafe motion as illustrated in
Figure 1c. Our limit study, using an “oracle” predictor, shows
that the number of CDQ evaluations performed during motion
planning can potentially be reduced by 25.1% − 40.7% versus
spatially-aware scheduling [43].
Our key insight, is that the physical spatial locality of
CDQ outcomes can be leveraged to enable accurate and
implementable collision prediction. We predict a pose to be
in collision if a “nearby” pose was found to collide with the
environment. As the robot and environment are assumed to
be dynamic, collision predictions are based only on CDQ outcomes since the last environment measurement (i.e., mapping).
We design a hashing function that bins physically nearby robot
poses together and enables a small and densely populated
collision history table. We further study the impact of environment characteristics, prediction strategies, and hash table
update strategies on collision prediction precision and recall.
We leverage insights from these studies to propose COORD, a
collision prediction approach to reduce computation for robot
motion planning.
We integrate COORD with CPU and GPU-based collision
detection and analyze its impact on execution time, computation, and collision prediction overheads. Further, several
collision detection hardware accelerators have been studied [3], [17], [34], [43] to meet the realtime requirements
and energy constraints of robotic systems. We propose a
hardware Collision Prediction Unit (COPU) that can be tightly
integrated with a specialized accelerator for collision detection.
Figure 1d compares the computation performed by COPU,
baseline accelerator [43], and Oracle predictor (Methodology described in Section V). COPU results in 17.2% −
32.1% reduction in the collision detection queries on average
across different motion planning algorithm-robot combinations. The proposed COPU increases performance/watt and
performance/mm2 of the baseline accelerator by 1.23× and
1.11×, respectively, while providing 1.18× higher collision
detection throughput. Further, the proposed Collision Prediction unit results in 23.4% − 42.9% reduction in the collision
detection queries for demanding benchmarks across different
motion planning algorithm-robot combinations. Finally, we
discuss the scope and limitations of the proposed approach
and demonstrate its integration with two more accelerators for
potential performance improvement. In summary, we make
the following contributions in this work:
• We demonstrate the potential of collision prediction to reduce collision detection queries during motion planning.
• We propose a collision history table and explore different
hashing approaches for collision prediction including CO-

(a) Robot in physical space
(b) Robot in C-space
Fig. 2: (a) and (b) represents a robot with 2 DOFs in the physical
and C-space, respectively. The C-space is two-dimensional as the
robot has 2 DOFs. P1 and P2 represent the poses of the robot, and
M12 represents the motion of the robot between these two poses. A
pose P is represented using the values of its joints x and y, which
corresponds to a point in the C-space with coordinates (x,y).

ORD, a hashing function that groups physically nearby
positions of a robot.
• We evaluate COORD with CPU and GPU-based execution of collision detection.
• We propose a hardware Collision Prediction Unit (COPU)
suitable for integration within hardware accelerators for
collision detection and evaluate it on various robots,
environments, and motion planning algorithms.
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
This section briefly summarizes relevant background on
robot motion planning and collision detection.
A. Motion Planning
An autonomous robot’s computational tasks are typically
divided into a pipeline consisting of perception, motion planning, and control stages. Motion planning often dominates [4]
and is used to find a collision-free and safe path for a robot
from its current position to a goal position. Its complexity
increases exponentially with the Degrees of Freedom (DOFs)
of a robot. Classical motion planning algorithms (e.g., Brooks
and Lozano-Perez [7]) operate in the configuration space (Cspace) of the robot. The C-space of the robot has the same
dimensions as its DOFs, where each dimension represents the
extent of its DOF (e.g., the angle of joint for a rotational DOF).
Figure 2a-2b gives an example of the physical space and Cspace of a robot with two DOFs. A pose/position of the robot
is specified by the values of its DOFs and is represented as a
point in the C-space (e.g., P1 and P2 in Figure 2b). Similarly,
a motion between two poses is represented as a line in the
C-space (e.g., M12 in Figure 2b).
After decades of research, a wide range of algorithms exist
for motion planning, including end-to-end learning-based,
optimization-based, and sampling-based motion planning approaches. In this paper, we focus on sampling-based motion
planning [6], [14], [15], [22], [26], [41], [50]. This approach
is favored for robots with high DOF because it avoids the
complexity of mapping environmental obstacles into C-space
while providing a balance between motion planning quality
and runtime.
A sampling-based motion planning algorithm is divided
into two parts: sampling and collision checks. Figure 3a-3b
give an example of motion planning using MPNet [41]. A

