HAL: Hardware-assisted Load Balancing for
Energy-efficient SNIC-Host Cooperative Computing
Jinghan Huang∗ , Jiaqi Lou∗ , Srikar Vanavasam∗ , Xinhao Kong† , Houxiang Ji∗ ,
Ipoom Jeong∗ , Danyang Zhuo† , Eun Kyung Lee‡ , Nam Sung Kim∗
∗ University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, † Duke University, ‡ IBM Research

the AMD SN1000 SNIC processor integrates such a processor
with an FPGA [75]. These SNICs have inspired a large body
of research work (e.g., [14], [21], [34], [47], [64], [73], [82]).
Meanwhile, it is noteworthy that server CPUs have also begun
to be integrated with accelerators, such as Intel® QuickAssist
Technology (QAT) [31], to efficiently execute these functions.
This trend sparks a question on whether the SNIC processor
can truly offer higher system-wide energy efficiency than such
server CPUs, especially when holistically considering other
important metrics for datacenter applications, such as tail
latency.
Answering this question, we first set up a commodity
server with a 100Gbps BF-2 and a QAT-equipped Intel Xeon
CPU (also referred to as the host processor hereafter). Next,
we take 10 popular network functions based on Data Plane
Development Kit (DPDK) [25], a widely adopted stack for
intra-datacenter networking [19]. We then proceed to evaluate system-wide energy efficiency and 99th -percentile (p99)
latency while running these functions on the SNIC processor
and the host processor, respectively. From this evaluation, we
make two observations. (1) The host accelerators, coupled with
a more powerful memory subsystem, outperform the SNIC
accelerators for the functions supported by both processors
in throughput, system-wide energy efficiency, and p99 latency
at high packet rates. (2) The SNIC processor can improve
system-wide energy efficiency over the host processor only
at low packet rates for most functions under p99 latency
constraints. These observations remain unchanged even with
the latest 200Gbps BlueField-3 (BF-3) SNIC, as the host
processor also has become more powerful with more CPU
cores and accelerators.
These suggest that we should use both processors cooperatively to accomplish both high energy efficiency and low p99
latency simultaneously. To efficiently support such cooperative
computing, we propose HAL, a Hardware-Assisted Load balancer in this work. HAL aims to balance the load between two
processors such that the SNIC processor receives only what it
can efficiently process, while the host processor handles the
excess. As the host processor handles high packet rates only
intermittently [6], [81], and the SNIC processor undertakes
low packet rates most of the time, HAL can achieve both
high energy efficiency and low p99 latency at any packet rates.
Specifically, we propose HAL consisting of (1) a hardwarebased load balancer integrated with SNIC hardware and (2)

Abstract—A typical SmartNIC (SNIC) integrates a processor
comprising Arm CPU and accelerators with a conventional NIC.
The processor is designed to energy-efficiently execute network
functions frequently used by datacenter applications. With such a
processor, the SNIC has promised to notably improve the systemwide energy efficiency of datacenter servers. Nevertheless, the
latest trend of integrating accelerators into server CPUs for these
functions sparks a question on the SNIC processor’s superiority
over a host processor (i.e., server CPU with accelerators) in
system-wide energy efficiency, especially under given tail latency
constraints. Answering this question, we first take an Intel Xeon
processor, integrated with various accelerators (e.g., QuickAssist
Technology), as a host processor, and then compare it to an
NVIDIA BlueField-2 SNIC processor. This uncovers that (1) the
host accelerator, coupled with a more powerful memory subsystem, can outperform the SNIC accelerator, and (2) the SNIC
processor can improve system-wide energy efficiency only at low
packet rates for most functions under tail latency constraints. To
provide high system-wide energy efficiency without compromising
tail latency at any packet rates, we propose HAL, consisting of a
hardware-based load balancer and an intelligent load balancing
policy implemented inside the SNIC. When HAL determines that
the SNIC processor cannot efficiently process a given function
beyond a specific packet rate, it limits the rate of packets to the
SNIC processor and lets the host processor handle the excess. We
implement a HAL-enabled SNIC with a commodity FPGA and
a BlueField-2 SNIC, plug it into a commodity server, and run 10
popular network functions. Our evaluation shows that HAL can
improve the system-wide energy efficiency and throughput of the
server running these functions by 31% and 10%, respectively,
without notably increasing the tail latency.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The single-thread performance of CPUs has remained stagnant due to the demise of Dennard scaling [17]. Meanwhile, as
the speed of networks gets faster in datacenters, server CPUs
are required to process more packets per second. For example,
to fully use the bandwidth of 100Gbps Ethernet, a server CPU
core operating at 2.5GHz must process 625-million packets
per second when the size of the packets is 20 bytes. This
gives the CPU core only 4 cycles to process one packet.
Furthermore, the server CPUs often process the packets with
various network functions such as compression, cryptography,
and packet inspection, consuming a significant fraction of cycles and energy. This motivates hyperscalers to explore the use
of a SmartNIC (SNIC), which integrates a low-cost/energyefficient processor with a conventional NIC for executing these
functions. For instance, an NVIDIA BlueField-2 SNIC (BF-2)
processor comprises an Arm CPU and accelerators [51], while

1

an intelligent load balancing policy running on an SNIC CPU
core, described below.
Hardware-based Load Balancer. It constantly monitors the
rate of received packets and compares it with a threshold
set by the load balancing policy running on an SNIC CPU
core. When it finds that the rate exceeds the threshold, it
limits the rate of packets delivered to the SNIC processor
to the threshold while replacing the IP/MAC address of the
excess packets with that of the host processor. After receiving
those packets with two different destination IP/MAC addresses
from the load balancer, the embedded switch hardware (§II-A)
forwards them to their respective destinations (i.e., SNIC or
host processor). Lastly, it takes packets sent from the host
processor and modifies the source IP/MAC address of these
packets to the IP/MAC address associated with the SNIC
processor. This guarantees that the packets from the host
processor are correctly delivered to the clients that expect to
receive packets with the source IP/MAC address linked to the
SNIC processor.
Intelligent Load Balancing Policy. It periodically checks the
occupancy of DPDK Rx queues in the SNIC CPU cores and
the throughput of the SNIC processor using DPDK APIs to
assess whether the SNIC processor is efficiently processing the
received packets. Subsequently, it determines an appropriate
threshold based on the occupancy and the throughput. Lastly,
it sets the determined threshold to the hardware load balancer.
With a PCIe-attached SNIC (PCIe-SNIC), HAL described
above is efficient only for stateless functions. To address such
a limitation, we propose integrating HAL with an emerging
CXL-attached SNIC (CXL-SNIC).
CXL-attached SNIC for Stateful Functions. When the SNIC
processor and the host processor cooperatively process packets
with a given stateful function, both may access and change
the states of the function. This demands shared memory
and cache coherence between the SNIC processor and the
host processor which PCIe-SNIC cannot efficiently provide.
Nonetheless, HAL can efficiently handle stateful functions,
exploiting the hardware-managed shared memory and cache
coherence features of CXL-SNIC. Since no CXL-SNIC has
been available yet, to demonstrate the efficacy of HAL for
stateful functions, we take an emulation approach based on
the insights below. CXL-SNIC is expected to implement the
CXL.cache protocol [3]. As the CXL.cache protocol is derived
from the Intel UPI [27] protocol used for cache-coherent
NUMA servers, it shares many characteristics with the UPI
protocol. Analyzing SNIC architectures, we observe that the
SNIC processor is connected to the networking subsystem of
the NIC through (on-chip) PCIe (§II-A). Therefore, we can
emulate a server with a CXL-SNIC using a NUMA server.
One node connected to a standard NIC through (off-chip) PCIe
serves as a CXL-SNIC, while the other socket serves as the
host.
We evaluate HAL using a commodity server, three datacenter network traffic workloads, and ten popular stateless and
stateful functions. Our evaluation shows that HAL does not
compromise p99 latency while improving system-wide energy

efficiency and throughput by 31% and 10%, respectively,
compared to the host processor processing every packet.
II. BACKGROUND
A. SNIC Architecture
An SNIC integrates a conventional NIC with a processor
comprising CPU, accelerators, and/or FPGA. For example,
BF-2 is a CPU-based SNIC integrating NVIDIA ConnectX6 Dx, a conventional 100Gbps NIC [52], with the following
subsystems: (1) 8 Arm A72 CPU cores, 256KB L1 data and
384KB instruction caches per core, 1MB L2 cache per two
cores, and shared 6MB L3 cache; (2) a cache-coherent on-chip
interconnect (e.g., Arm Coherent Hub Interface (CHI) [5]); (3)
an embedded switch (eSwitch); (4) a PCIe switch; (5) a DDR43200 DRAM controller; (6) 16GB on-board DRAM; and (7)
accelerators, as depicted in Fig. 1.
The BF-2 processor provides three accelerators for network functions commonly used by datacenter applications:
(1) regular expression matching (REM), (2) cryptography, and
(3) (de)compression. The REM accelerator checks whether
packets received through DPDK APIs contain specific string
patterns. The SNIC CPU programs the string patterns as
a compiled ruleset to the accelerator through Data CenterOn-a-Chip Architecture (DOCA) Software Development Kit
(SDK) APIs [50]. The cryptography accelerator supports 24
public key acceleration (PKA) algorithms, such as Rivest,
Shamir, and Adleman (RSA) [61], Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) [15], Diffie–Hellman (DH) [48], Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) [56], and Secure Hashing Algorithm
(SHA) [55]. The SNIC CPU programs a specific PKA algorithm to a designated SNIC memory region, and then it
controls accelerator operations through a memory-mapped register. The (de)compression accelerator is based on Deflate [58],
and (de)compresses a given file received through DPDK APIs.
In addition, BF-2 offers hardware-assisted acceleration of
Open vSwitch (OvS) [60], a software implementation of a

Host CPU
Cores

Main memory
On-chip
interconnect

LLCs

Bluefield-2 SmartNIC

Memory controller
I/O controller

Host
DRAM

PCIe
switch

Packet flow
Acceleration path

6 MB L3 cache

16 GB DDR 4 DRAM

L2 cache

L2 cache

A72

A72

A72

A72

L2 cache

L2 cache

A72

A72

A72

ARM subsystem

A72

eSwitch
flow
steering

RegEx matching

MAC

Cryptography

Tx/Rx

(De)compression

ConnectX-6
Dx subsystem

Accelerator
subsystem

DMA

Ports

Fig. 1: NVIDIA BlueField-2 SNIC architecture.

2

