DRAMScope: Uncovering DRAM Microarchitecture
and Characteristics by Issuing Memory Commands
Hwayong Nam† , Seungmin Baek† , Minbok Wi† , Michael Jaemin Kim† , Jaehyun Park† , Chihun Song‡ ,
Nam Sung Kim‡ , Jung Ho Ahn†
† Seoul National University, ‡ University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

arXiv:2405.02499v1 [cs.CR] 3 May 2024

† {nhy4916, qortmdalss, homakaka, michael604, wogus20002, gajh}@snu.ac.kr, ‡ {chihuns2, nskim}@illinois.edu

Abstract—The demand for precise information on DRAM
microarchitectures and error characteristics has surged, driven
by the need to explore processing in memory, enhance reliability,
and mitigate security vulnerability. Nonetheless, DRAM manufacturers have disclosed only a limited amount of information,
making it difficult to find specific information on their DRAM
microarchitectures. This paper addresses this gap by presenting
more rigorous findings on the microarchitectures of commodity
DRAM chips and their impacts on the characteristics of activateinduced bitflips (AIBs), such as RowHammer and RowPress. The
previous studies have also attempted to understand the DRAM
microarchitectures and associated behaviors, but we have found
some of their results to be misled by inaccurate address mapping
and internal data swizzling, or lack of a deeper understanding
of the modern DRAM cell structure. For accurate and efficient
reverse-engineering, we use three tools: AIBs, retention time
test, and RowCopy, which can be cross-validated. With these
three tools, we first take a macroscopic view of modern DRAM
chips to uncover the size, structure, and operation of their
subarrays, memory array tiles (MATs), and rows. Then, we
analyze AIB characteristics based on the microscopic view of
the DRAM microarchitecture, such as 6F2 cell layout, through
which we rectify misunderstandings regarding AIBs and discover
a new data pattern that accelerates AIBs. Lastly, based on our
findings at both macroscopic and microscopic levels, we identify
previously unknown AIB vulnerabilities and propose a simple
yet effective protection solution.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A deep understanding of DRAM microarchitecture and
error characteristics is more important than ever; processing
in memory (PIM) spotlighted [10], [33], [34], [51], [63],
soft/hard error rate exacerbated [1], [23], [67], and yet another
activate-induced bitflip (AIB) vulnerability discovered [39].
For instance, constructing secure and efficient AIB protection
solutions without an accurate understanding of DRAM error
behaviors linked to specific aspects of a DRAM microarchitecture would be undoubtedly challenging. Likewise, a detailed
knowledge of the DRAM microarchitecture is essential in
exploring efficient PIM architectures. However, the DRAM
microarchitecture has undergone decades of optimizations to
improve not only the cell density or energy efficiency but
also the manufacturing yield and cost. Such optimizations
are manufacturer-specific and proprietary [61], significantly
hindering efforts to uncover the true DRAM microarchitecture
and error characteristics.

To fill this critical gap, a large body of prior work has exploited creative reverse-engineering methodologies. They have
relied on scarcely disclosed knowledge or assumptions [4],
[17], [18], [21], [43], [44] to uncover error characteristics [4],
[25], [29], [36], [39], [50], undefined DRAM operations [62],
[82], microarchitectural components transparent to memory
controllers, such as AIB protection solutions [9], [13] or ondie ECC [54], [55], to list a few. Nonetheless, we have found
a number of previous efforts to discover the DRAM microarchitecture are limited in scope, outdated, or even misleading
due to an insufficient understanding of the modern DRAM
6F2 cell structure (see Figure 2), complex mapping of CPU
physical addresses to DRAM addresses, and swizzling of CPU
data within DRAM.1
In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study to better understand the DRAM microarchitecture (macroscopic
level) and AIB characteristics (microscopic level) of modern
DRAM chips, leveraging three different reverse-engineering
techniques and our recent knowledge of the aforementioned
address mapping and data swizzling. Without a thorough
understanding of the address mapping and data swizzling,
attempting to control DRAM chips can lead to inconsistencies between the user’s intended access and the physical
access. Similarly, comprehending the 6F2 cell structure and
the physical distances between cells and intervening gate
types is essential for obtaining clearer insights from reverseengineering efforts. We uniquely exploit this interplay by utilizing DRAM errors to uncover the DRAM microarchitecture
while simultaneously leveraging our recent microarchitectural
knowledge to investigate error characteristics.
Reliable and cross-validatable reverse-engineering techniques (§III): To reverse-engineer the DRAM microarchitecture without intrusive measures such as physical probing [4], [5], we use three techniques using standard DRAM
commands in a controlled FPGA-based environment. The
three techniques are as follows: (1) causing AIBs such as
RowHammer [29] and RowPress [39], (2) performing inmemory row copy operations (RowCopy) [10], [62], and (3)
inducing data retention errors. Analyzing the results obtained
from these three techniques provides us with not only the
1 DRAM internal data swizzling occurs as data collected from the subarray
is reorganized to get transferred to the CPU. See § IV.

2 The edge subarrays of an open bitline structure utilize only half the bitlines,
leaving the other half as dummy bitlines.

Sub-wordline (WL)
DRAM
module
Chip

Local bitline (BL)
SA

Bank
Subarray
Local row buffer

Chip
Local row buffer
Mat
Chip

Subarray
Local row buffer

Figure 1.

DRAM cell
SA

Local row decoder
Sub-wordline drivers

accurate error characteristics but also the hidden details of
the DRAM microarchitecture. Furthermore, we highlight the
challenges posed by intricate address mapping and data swizzling schemes, including row address remapping at individual
DRAM chips, row address inversion at the registered clock
driver (RCD) chip, and data pin (DQ) twisting. Although such
information is often publicly disclosed [19], [21], they are
scattered across documents and can easily be omitted, leading
to incorrect analysis.
Macroscopic DRAM microarchitectural analysis (§IV):
We conduct a macroscopic analysis that does not require
knowledge of the 6F2 cell structure to reverse-engineer the
data swizzling and identify previously unreported structural
Observations at the subarray, row, and memory array tile
(MAT) levels. (O1) We reconstruct the DRAM chip internal
data swizzling based on our observation that horizontally
adjacent victim cells affect AIB, which we elaborate later in
§V. We observe that data within a single read are reorganized
and collected from multiple MATs. (O2) We also identify the
MAT width, or the number of cells constituting a single row
in a MAT. (O3) For certain DRAM chips, two separate rows
specified in physical address are coupled and activated together
by a single row command. (O4) For all tested DRAM modules,
the number of rows in a single subarray (height) is not a power
of two, and multiple subarray heights can coexist even in a
single chip. Also, we recognize a clear trend of increase in
subarray height over DRAM generations. (O5) Certain DRAM
chips combine two subarrays at the physical edge to work in
tandem (edge subarrays), which is deducible from the open
bitline structure [16]. (O6) The bit error rate (BER) by AIB is
lower in edge subarrays, possibly due to the dummy bitlines.2
Microscopic DRAM error analysis (§V): With our microscopic analysis that exploits our knowledge of the 6F2 cell
structure, we present the following observations. (O7) There
exists an alternating pattern in RowPress vulnerability, which
reverses when either the row parity (even/odd) changes or the
aggressor direction (up/down) changes. This faithfully reflects
the 6F2 cell structure. (O8) RowHammer also exhibits a
similar alternating pattern, which is reversed when row parity,
aggressor direction, or the written value (0/1) changes. (O9)
RowHamemr occurs at both types of cell access transistors,
i.e., neighboring and passing gates (§II-B). (O10) A victim
cell is only susceptible from RowHammer to only one type of
the gate at a time, which is reversed when the written value
changes. (O11) Given a particular victim cell, its horizontally adjacent four victim cells’ data affect its RowHammer
vulnerability, which becomes strongest at a distance of two.
(O12) Similar horizontal influence exists in the aggressor row,
which becomes weakest at distance two. We also find that a
newly-discovered adversarial data pattern (O13) decreases the
activation count that triggers the first bitflips (Hcnt ) in a victim
row by up to 81% and (O14) exacerbates the overall bit error
rate (BER) of the victim row by up to 1.69×.

Mat

SA

SA

Conventional DRAM organization.

New vulnerabilities and protection patches (§VI): Based
on the new observations at both macroscopic and microscopic
levels, we identify previously unknown AIB vulnerabilities
and propose a simple yet effective protection solution. First,
we identify that edge subarrays and coupled rows can pose a
new threat to existing AIB protection solutions, those driven
by the memory controller. Besides, it can facilitate the attacker
to succeed in a memory templating/massaging [30] phase,
which is an essential part of a successful attack. Second,
we demonstrate that, depending on the intention of the AIB
attack, we can exploit an adversarial data pattern: (1) to
achieve a specific cell’s bitflip or (2) to maximize the number
of bitflips in the target row by collocating the row and
column data/directional dependence. Lastly, countering this,
we propose a simple yet effective data masking mechanism
that can prevent the exploitation of such vulnerability.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we present the background on DRAM organization, microarchitectures, and operations. We also overview
DRAM activate-induced bitflips (AIBs).
A. DRAM Organization
A DRAM module is hierarchically organized, from top
to bottom, chips, banks, subarrays, MATs, and cells (see
Figure 1). A DRAM cell consists of a capacitor and an
access transistor, indexed by row/column address via the
corresponding wordline (WL) and bitline (BL), respectively.
A row decoder enables a specific WL, which turns on the
access transistors that connect the cell capacitors to the sense
amplifiers (SAs) via BLs. Each cell stores 1-bit data, and is
classified into true-cell (anti-cell) if a charged state represents
1 (0) [36], [41], [77]. An SA senses and amplifies a voltage
small difference in a pair of BLs and temporarily stores the
value of a cell.
DRAM cells form a 2D array structure referred to as MAT,
and an array of MATs constitute a single subarray. A single
read/write command reads and writes data from one or more
MATs. A subarray can have either an open or folded bitline
structure, depending on whether a single SA is connected to
both the upper and lower BLs (open) or not (folded) [16].
In an open BL structure, half BLs of a subarray share SAs
with those of the upper subarray and the other half BLs of a
subarray with those of the lower subarray.

