2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00063

2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)

BlitzCoin: Fully Decentralized Hardware
Power Management for Accelerator-Rich SoCs
Martin Cochet1, Karthik Swaminathan1, Erik Loscalzo2, Joseph Zuckerman2, Maico Cassel dos Santos2, Davide Giri2,
Alper Buyuktosunoglu1, Tianyu Jia3, David Brooks3, Gu-Yeon Wei3, Kenneth Shepard2, Luca P. Carloni2, and Pradip Bose1
1 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 2 Columbia University, New York, NY 3 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
Abstract—On-chip power-management techniques have evolved
over several processor generations. However, response time and
scalability constraints have made it difficult to translate existing powermanagement strategies to current or next-generation System-on-Chip
(SoC) architectures, which are expected to comprise tens to hundreds of
cores and accelerators. In this work we present BlitzCoin, a fully decentralized hardware power-management strategy for large, acceleratorrich SoCs, coupled with optimized unified voltage and frequency regulation. We evaluated BlitzCoin through RTL simulations of multiple
SoCs targeted toward different application domains. The results are
further validated through silicon measurements of a fabricated 12 nm
many-accelerator SoC that includes BlitzCoin. Our evaluations show
that BlitzCoin is markedly faster, with 8× to 12× lower response times,
which provides 25%-34% throughput improvement and allows for scaling to 7× to 13× larger SoCs compared to state-of-the-art centralized
power-management strategies, all with an area overhead of <1%.

Fig. 1. Scalability of different power-management strategies in terms of their
response time (solid lines) and the average interval between SoC-level activity
change (dashed lines) for different accelerator-level workload phase durations Tw .
The intersection of a solid line and a dashed line represents the maximum number
of accelerators Nmax that can be supported for a given workload phase duration
and power-management strategy.

I. INTRODUCTION
Chip power management is a mature field with over two
decades of research and development work, which has resulted
in on-chip deployments included in several generations of
commercial processors in the market today [1]–[8]. In particular,
workload-driven multi-core power management has been the focus
of several industrial products and research papers, from Intel [1],
[9]–[13], IBM [14]–[21], AMD [22]–[25] and Qualcomm [26], as
well as other works from academia [27]–[40]. However, contrary
to popular belief that there remains no more room for innovation
in this area, recent paradigm shifts necessitate rethinking and
reinventing power management strategies moving forward.
SoC architectures have rapidly evolved to use an increased
number of specialized hardware units and fixed-function
accelerators on a single chip. This evolution in SoC architectures
has come with increasingly complex applications not only in terms
of the number and type of processing elements (PEs) utilized but
also because of high dynamic variation in the utilization of the PEs.
Modern-day accelerator-rich SoCs, such as the Apple Mobile Aseries, devote over 60% of the chip area to such specialized IP blocks
in addition to traditional CPU/GPU cores [41]. These blocks include
accelerators for pixel processing, depth and motion estimation, deep
learning, and more. Largely driven by the slowdown of technology
scaling, this trend does not appear to be ending anytime soon.
Due to the diversity of power profiles of processing elements
in heterogeneous SoCs, power-management strategies for such
systems must provide a large range of fine-grained power states.

Furthermore, different power-allocation strategies should be
supported to accommodate varying applications and operating
modes. As further detailed in Section VII, the prior art targeting
homogeneous SoCs does not fully address these requirements.
In order for an SoC to effectively utilize the available energy,
its power management must react faster than the typical interval
at which a workload changes its phase (Tw ). Fig. 1 presents scaling
trends for the rate of workload changes in a multi-accelerator SoC
architecture (dashed lines) and response time trends (solid lines)
for different power-management strategies. Here, response time is
defined as the time for the power-management unit to react to a
change in activity and adjust the power allocation of all accelerators
accordingly. For example, if for a given accelerator a workload
starts or ends on average once per Tw =5ms, then for an SoC with
N = 20 accelerators, a new power-management decision will be
1
required, on average, once every Tw /N = 20
.5ms=250μs.
Conventional software-based, centralized power-management
schemes [18], [39] have response times on the order of 1 ms for
a small number of accelerators and scale linearly with the number
of accelerators. As the response time required to adapt to changes
in workload phase (Tw , dashed curves) decreases with increasing
number of accelerators, a centralized software-management implementation (red curve, response time proportional to N) cannot even
scale up to 10 accelerators for a workload with Tw ≤20ms.
Most modern processors have on-chip controllers containing specialized hardware/firmware units embedded within the chip. They
are responsible for monitoring power and temperature sensors and
adjusting the voltage and frequency of each PE to maximize performance within power constraints. They have significantly reduced re-

This research was developed with funding from the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA). The views, opinions and/or findings expressed are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or
policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.

979-8-3503-2658-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00063

801

Authorized licensed use limited to: Columbia University Libraries. Downloaded on August 05,2025 at 22:12:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sponse times compared to software controllers. However, due to the
reliance on a single centralized hardware power-management unit,
the response time still scales linearly with the number of accelerators
(orange curve). Consequently, a centralized on-chip controller strategy with firmware-controlled power management would be rendered
ineffective, since it would not be capable of rapid actuation every few
μs for large values of N. Furthermore, it would limit the scalability of
the system to a few tens of accelerators, as response-time constraints
and network contention would be exacerbated in larger systems.
In contrast, in a decentralized approach, pairs of accelerators can
exchange information in parallel across a 2-D mesh, providing a
faster response than centralized schemes. A decentralized hardware
approach, then, combines the fast μs-scale response time of a
centralized hardware unit with sub-linear response time scaling
in the number of accelerators (green curve). As seen on the graph,
decentralized power management can handle workloads with
timescales on the order of 1 ms for large SoCs (N≥100).
In this paper, we propose BlitzCoin, a fully-decentralized
power-management architecture for accelerator-rich SoCs.
Section II provides an overview of centralized and decentralized
power management in heterogeneous SoCs, while in Section III, we
present BlitzCoin at an algorithmic level and conduct a thorough
design-space exploration through a variety of simulation-based
√
experiments, showing a response time that scales with N.
Section IV describes the hardware implementation of BlitzCoin.
A decentralized approach necessitates compact and fast-responding
voltage and frequency regulation. For this work, we further
require a regulation approach that is easy to replicate across the
heterogeneous tiles of a many-accelerator SoC. These requirements
informed the design of a Unified Voltage and Frequency Regulation
(UVFR) scheme. We implemented the control algorithm in RTL
and also designed the UVFR scheme targeting a 12 nm technology
node. We then integrated BlitzCoin with the whole per-tile DVFS
implementation into an open-source many-accelerator SoC platform
to allow for full-system experiments using BlitzCoin.
Section V outlines our experimental methodology. We leveraged
full-SoC RTL simulation to conduct an in-depth analysis of our
implementation. However, BlitzCoin relies on complex interactions
between software workloads, digital logic, and analog components.
Such complexity cannot be fully accurately characterized with
existing circuit and architecture simulation tools. Only a silicon
implementation can fully validate the approach. Hence, the
capstone of this work is the integration of BlitzCoin into a complex
heterogeneous SoC prototype fabricated in a 12 nm technology.
Section VI shows the simulated results and their validation with the
fully-functional silicon. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
hardware implementation of a decentralized power-management
strategy in a heterogeneous SoC.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• BlitzCoin, a decentralized power-management strategy for heterogeneous SoCs that is based on a novel coin-exchange algorithm.
• A design-space exploration of BlitzCoin in order to determine
the configuration parameters that yield optimized results in terms
of convergence time and power allocation.
• A demonstration of tile-level DVFS, in conjunction with
BlitzCoin, consisting of the combination of a LDO regulator and a

free-running oscillator for unified voltage and frequency regulation.
• A complete implementation of BlitzCoin, integrated into
many-accelerator SoCs using an open-source hardware platform,
validated by silicon measurements carried out on a 64 mm2 SoC
fabricated in 12 nm technology.
• An evaluation of BlitzCoin using different workloads and powerallocation strategies; the results demonstrate superior response time
(up to 12× faster) and throughput (up to 34% better), compared
to state-of-the-art centralized power-management strategies [42],
[43], and scalability to SoCs with hundreds of accelerators.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Power-Management Challenges in Heterogeneous SoCs
Most academic and commercial work has been focused on
addressing workload-driven multi-core power management for
homogeneous CPU-centric SoCs [34], [40], [44]–[46]. However,
heterogeneous SoC power management presents significant additional challenges. First, a wide range of power consumption across
heterogeneous accelerators, up to 10× as observed in [47], requires
the power-management unit to actuate at a fine granularity, as well
as span a wide range of values. Second, accelerators with different
power profiles cannot efficiently be grouped in a single power
domain, unlike in homogeneous chip multiprocessors (CMPs) where
multiple (2 to 4) cores are often grouped into a single domain [43],
[48]. In contrast, heterogeneous SoCs require one DVFS domain
per accelerator [42], [47]. This finer spatial granularity further
increases the complexity of power management. Third, unlike in
homogeneous CMPs where one can define an aggregated throughput
metric, such as MIPS, to measure the instantaneous efficiency of a
given power allocation, there is no equivalent metric to aggregate the
throughput across heterogeneous accelerators with widely varying
workloads, making an optimal power-allocation scheme across accelerators infeasible. Instead, current state-of-the art designs propose
heuristic-based greedy [42], fair [49], or equal [50] power allocations.
Fourth, fixed-function accelerators might not be programmable (i.e.
execute instructions) and therefore may not be able to run an OS or
other software for power management. OS kernel approaches, such
as those demonstrated in [43], cannot be distributed across these
kinds of accelerators, and would need to rely on software running
on the general-purpose cores. Hence, for SoCs that feature many
fixed-function accelerators, a hardware implementation is required
to perform fully-distributed power management.
B. Centralized vs. Decentralized Control
On-chip power management can rely on a centralized or
decentralized control scheme. In either case, the SoC is partitioned
into tiles. Each tile contains a single PE and logic to communicate
with other tiles. In the centralized case, a single On-chip Controller
(OCC) receives inputs, such as utilization statistics, offline
characterization data in the case of custom accelerators, and other
sensor data, from every tile and determines the voltage/frequency
operating points and the available power budget based on these
inputs. Prior power-management designs for heterogeneous SoCs,
such as [42], use an OCC consisting of a centralized on-chip DVFS
controller and a software daemon that implements the desired
DVFS policy. The target voltage and frequency of each tile are then

802
Authorized licensed use limited to: Columbia University Libraries. Downloaded on August 05,2025 at 22:12:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

