arXiv:2406.14571v1 [cs.AR] 11 Jun 2024

PreSto: An In-Storage Data Preprocessing System
for Training Recommendation Models
Yunjae Lee†

Hyeseong Kim†

Minsoo Rhu

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
yunjae408@kaist.ac.kr

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
hyeseong.kim@kaist.ac.kr

School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
mrhu@kaist.ac.kr

Traditionally, the RecSys training pipeline employed offline
data preprocessing where the raw data retrieved from the
storage system is transformed into train-ready tensors in
advance and gets archived at a separate storage space for future
usage. However, the proliferation of petabyte-scale data and
the wide variety of RecSys models developed by ML engineers
have rendered offline preprocessing to incur an intractable
amount of overhead [70]. Specifically, it becomes increasingly
difficult to provision the substantial storage space required to
store all the data preprocessed offline, while also adapting to
changes in the newly developed RecSys models.
These challenges have triggered a shift towards online
preprocessing, which involves preprocessing the raw data “onthe-fly”. Online preprocessing obviates the need to separately
store the preprocessed data, so it helps better respond to
changes in the model architecture [70]. Nevertheless, these
online preprocessing approaches introduce several system-level
challenges, potentially causing a throughput mismatch between
I. I NTRODUCTION
data preprocessing and ML model training. Consider a scenario
Deep neural network (DNN) based machine learning (ML) al- where preprocessing and training jobs are co-located within
gorithms have demonstrated their effectiveness in a wide range the same GPU training server node, i.e., preprocessing is
of application domains. Among the successfully deployed ML undertaken on the host CPU that also manages the GPUapplications, recommendation systems (RecSys) have emerged side training job. If the CPU does not have a high enough
as a highly effective tool for online content recommendation computation power for preprocessing, it fails in generating
services. Such rising demand for recommendation services has sufficient amount of train-ready tensors that the GPU can
rendered hyperscalers to dedicate significant resources to the consume, leading to significant GPU underutilization (less than
development and training of diverse RecSys models to ensure 20% GPU utility, Section III-A). To address these challenges,
high-quality inference services. Unlike latency-optimized ML Zhao et al. [70] and Audibert et al. [5] suggest a server
inference, training algorithms are throughput-hungry workloads disaggregation solution where a pool of CPU servers is reserved
that favor high-performance, throughput-optimized accelerators for preprocessing purposes. Disaggregating CPU servers for
like GPUs. However, these power-hungry GPUs account preprocessing allows hundreds to thousands of CPU cores to be
for a large portion of ML system’s operating expenses, so allocated on-demand, even for a single data preprocessing job,
maintaining high GPU utilization becomes critical for lowering effectively closing the performance gap between preprocessing
TCO (total cost of ownership). Unfortunately, keeping the and model training thereby minimizing GPU idle time [25],
RecSys training pipeline busy with minimal GPU idle time [70]. However, this baseline “CPU-centric” disaggregated
requires the “data preprocessing” stage to preprocess an ample preprocessing incurs significant deployment cost and power
amount of raw data, so that the preprocessed, train-ready tensors consumption due to the large number of pooled CPU servers.
Given this landscape, an important objective of our work is
can be fed into the GPU in a seamless manner.
to characterize baseline CPU-centric disaggregated data prepro† Co-first authors who contributed equally to this research.
cessing systems targeting production-scale RecSys models, rootcausing its critical system-level challenges. A key observation
This is the author preprint version of the work. The authoritative version will
appear in the Proceedings of the 51st IEEE/ACM International Symposium we make is that the majority of data preprocessing time is
on Computer Architecture (ISCA-51), 2024.
spent conducting feature generation and feature normalization
Abstract—Training recommendation systems (RecSys) faces
several challenges as it requires the “data preprocessing” stage
to preprocess an ample amount of raw data and feed them to
the GPU for training in a seamless manner. To sustain high
training throughput, state-of-the-art solutions reserve a large
fleet of CPU servers for preprocessing which incurs substantial
deployment cost and power consumption. Our characterization
reveals that prior CPU-centric preprocessing is bottlenecked on
feature generation and feature normalization operations as it
fails to reap out the abundant inter-/intra-feature parallelism in
RecSys preprocessing. PreSto is a storage-centric preprocessing
system leveraging In-Storage Processing (ISP), which offloads the
bottlenecked preprocessing operations to our ISP units. We show
that PreSto outperforms the baseline CPU-centric system with a
9.6× speedup in end-to-end preprocessing time, 4.3× enhancement
in cost-efficiency, and 11.3× improvement in energy-efficiency on
average for production-scale RecSys preprocessing.
Index Terms—Recommendation system, computational storage
device, near data processing, neural network

operations, which inherently contain high inter-/intra-feature preprocessing includes Fourier transform and normalization of
parallelism. However, the latency-optimized CPU architectures, audio data [57]. Similarly, RecSys also requires a unique data
the de facto standard in data preprocessing, fail to fully exploit preprocessing to generate the train-ready tensors consumed by
the abundant inter-/intra-feature parallelism in feature gener- the model training stage, which we detail below.
ation and normalization, leading to sub-optimal performance.
Traditionally, the RecSys training pipeline employed offline
This in turn leads to the feature generation and normalization to data preprocessing where the raw feature data stored in the
account for 79% of the RecSys data preprocessing time, causing storage system is transformed into train-ready tensors well
the most significant performance bottleneck. To make up for the before model training takes place. However, the proliferation
meager preprocessing throughput provided with CPUs, the data of petabyte-scale data and the frequent development of dipreprocessing stage necessitates a large number of CPU cores verse RecSys models by ML engineers have made offline
(up to several hundreds) to be allocated so that its aggregate preprocessing impractical because it is difficult to manage
preprocessing throughput matches the throughput demands the substantial storage space required to store the offline
of GPU’s model training stage, which leads to substantial preprocessed data. This challenge has triggered a shift towards
deployment cost.
online preprocessing [70], which involves preprocessing the raw
In this work, we propose to employ accelerated computing feature data “on-the-fly” (Figure 1). The train-ready tensors
for RecSys data preprocessing to fundamentally address its are derived from the features that are constantly generated
system-level challenges at low cost. Because the abundant online by inference services. Specifically, inference servers log
inter-/intra-feature parallelism in data preprocessing is well- various end-user’s interactions with the inference service as
suited for domain-specific acceleration, our first key proposal distinct features (e.g., news feed a user has clicked, items a
is to offload the time-consuming feature generation and nor- user has purchased) using logging engines, e.g., Meta’s Scribe
malization operations to our accelerator for high-performance [28]. Additionally, various streaming and batch engines, such
data preprocessing. An important design decision still remains, as Spark [69], further label and filter data before storing them
however, regarding where our data preprocessing accelerator in a centralized data warehouse [72]. These raw feature data are
should be placed within the overall system architecture. State- categorized into two types: dense and sparse. Dense features
of-the-art data preprocessing solutions employ disaggregated represent continuous values (e.g., the time when a user viewed
CPU servers to dynamically allocate the right amount of a video from YouTube), while sparse features represent sparse
CPU cores for data preprocessing [5], [70]. While using our categorical values which can be variable-length (e.g., list of
data preprocessing accelerator as a drop-in replacement for YouTube videos a user has viewed over a one-hour period). The
CPUs within the disaggregated CPU servers is a practically logged features archived within the centralized data warehouse
feasible option, we observe that such a design point is sub- are then fetched into the storage system of each datacenter
optimal as it unnecessarily incurs high network traffic to for future data preprocessing. The data preprocessing stage,
copy data in (the raw data to be preprocessed) and out (the also known as the ETL (Extract, Transform, and Load) phase,
preprocessed train-ready tensors) of the disaggregated server involves the following series of operations:
for data preprocessing.
• (Extract) The logged raw feature data are first retrieved
To this end, we present PreSto (Preprocessing in-Storage),
from the storage system in preparation for the featurewhich is an In-Storage Processing (ISP) based data preprocessspecific transform operations.
ing system for RecSys training. In conventional systems, the
• (Transform) The extracted raw feature data go through
petabyte-scale raw data that is to be preprocessed are stored
feature generation and feature normalization in order to
in a distributed storage system. Rather than copying the raw
generate the train-ready tensors.
data over the datacenter network and preprocessing them at a
• (Load) The train-ready tensors are copied over to the
disaggregated, remote preprocessing server, PreSto conducts
GPU’s high-bandwidth memory (HBM) in preparation for
preprocessing near data using ISP. We demonstrate that such
the RecSys model training.
“storage-centric” data preprocessing can effectively close the
performance gap between preprocessing and model training
Once the train-ready tensors are loaded into GPU’s memory,
at a much lower cost compared to existing solutions. Overall, the actual model training is undertaken. Specifically, the GPU
PreSto provides high speedup on data preprocessing perfor- executes the embedding layers (embedding lookups, pooling for
mance (average 9.6×) at low cost, significantly reducing the embedding reductions), feature interactions (batched GEMM),
TCO (average 4.3×) and energy consumption (average 11.3×) and MLP layers (GEMM). When it comes to embedding layers,
vs. the baseline CPU-centric disaggregated preprocessing.
the embedding look-up operation retrieves embeddings from
an embedding table [51], which utilizes embedding indices
II. BACKGROUND
that are generated during the Transform phase of ETL (e.g.,
A. End-to-End RecSys Training Pipeline
the embedding indices transformed from feature X’ and W in
DNNs typically require some form of input data prepro- Figure 1 are utilized for embedding look-up operations). Recent
cessing before training. For instance, image classification work on various system-level performance optimizations for
requires preprocessing operations like image decoding, resizing, RecSys has primarily focused on this “training” stage of endcropping, or augmentation. Additionally, speech recognition to-end training pipeline, rather than data preprocessing. The

