update. Finally, the multiply result is calculated in the same
way as Fig. 5 for both the upper and lower m bits ( 4 and
5 in Fig. 6). In total, the latency of vfmul is only (5m+4e+4)
cycles, including the time of adding the exponent field.
Since a needs to be duplicated and occupies m different
rows in a chain, the next element in the input vector will
occupy a different chain. Thus, the total vector length of the
entire memory array is reduced by m times. Yet even in terms
of throughput, our vfmul is still 20% better than the bit-serial
approach in [12], as the latter spends more than 6m2 cycles for
FP values. Moreover, when the physical vector length of the
memory array is much longer than the vector length of the data
structure, our vfmul can achieve more than m× throughput
improvement.
Dot-Product (vfdot.vv) – Similar as vfmul, FloatAP can
realize the vfdot.vv, the most critical operation for tensorbased applications, by simultaneously leveraging the associative memory and the adder tree. We do not adopt the
straightforward implementation of vfdot with back-to-back
vfmul and vfredsum. Instead, we exploit the commutativity of
addition to reorder the sum in vfredsum and in vfmul based on
Equation (2) when calculating the dot-product of the mantissa
vectors, like in other tree-based dot-product proposals for
integers [15], [49]. In this way, FloatAP does not need to
replicate and shift the mantissa of v1 like in vfmul. Instead,
every element in v1 and v2 occupies a different row in a chain
like in other vector operations such as vfadd. As a result, the
vfdot can achieve much higher FLOPS than vfmul.
Listing 2 shows the pseudo-code of vfdot. Before calculating
the dot-product of the mantissa fields, FloatAP first needs
to add v1 and v2’s exponent vectors (line 5 in Listing 2),
and align M1 based on this Esum vector (line 8). Those
two steps require (5e + 4m + 6) cycles. Then, it calculates
the dot-product of the mantissa fields
Pvlen in m iterations. In
each iteration, FloatAP calculates
i=0 M1 [i] ∗ M2 [i].bitj
for a different j value. Specifically, the M1 [i] ∗ M2 [i].bitj in
Equation (2) is realized by a vector AND operation (line 13).
FloatAP can efficiently implement it using one search
Pvlen and two
updates, similar to 3 in Fig. 6. The inner sum i=0 is then
calculated using the same method as Fig. 5,Ptaking m cycles
m−1
(line 14 in Listing 2). As for the outer sum j=0 and the 2j
item, FloatAP amortizes them across the m iterations. In each
iteration, it only needs to calculate a scalar add-accumulation
(line 14) and multiply-accumulation (line 15) using the ×2 and
accumulate units at the root of the adder tree. The latency is
completely hidden behind the vredsum operation. In addition,
as Fig. 5 shows that, during vredsum, the chain does not
perform any search/update in all the m cycles except for the
first one. Therefore, FloatAP can overlap line 14 in iteration
(j − 1) with line 13 in iteration j. Thus, the entire step 3
in Listing 2 only takes (m2 + 6) cycles, including a fivecycle latency to fill the pipelined adder tree. In total, the vfdot
operation takes (5e+m2 +4m+12) cycles. Compared to a backto-back vfmul and vfredsum, our vfdot algorithm achieves more
than 4× throughput improvement.

D. Handling Special Values
FloatAP can efficiently handle all the special values listed
in Table I. Since FloatAP can search a pattern across a vector
in one cycle, it can quickly locate special values and handle
them before performing computation on normal values. This
entire handling process is done using parallel search/update,
eliminating the need for additional exception-handling logic.
Specifically, the denormal values are handled during the
mantissa-integer conversion discussed in Sec. III-B. FloatAP
first searches all zeros across the exponent field to locate
denormal values in a vector. These values are then masked
out when resolving the hidden-1 for normal FP numbers.
After that, both normal and denormal values’ mantissas are
converted to two’s complement. Finally, FloatAP updates the
exponent of denormals from zero to one in parallel so that they
can be interpreted as normal values in future computations.
The overall overhead is merely several cycles.
FloatAP supports both quiet and signaling modes for Infs
and NaNs. Before an arithmetic operation, FloatAP first
searches for and locates them. In signaling mode, it will
directly trigger an invalid operation exception. In quiet mode,
FloatAP will visit all the propagation rules (e.g., ∞+x=∞,
∞*0=NaN), search for the input combinations across input
vectors, and update the output of the matched lanes according
to the rules. Even if 0, Inf, and NaN all exist, the worstcase overhead is merely 8 cycles. Moreover, if the arithmetic
behavior and dataset are both trustworthy, FloatAP can disable
the special value handling to avoid the overhead or perform
sanity checks periodically using search operations.
E. Other Functionalities
Using addition and multiplication as basic operations,
FloatAP can efficiently implement other more complex functionalities, such as MAC, division, and non-linear activation
functions (e.g., GELU or Sigmoid), with the Newton-Raphson
method or Taylor-Maclaurin series. This way, FloatAP can
perform any operations without assistance from other compute
engines. Any frequently used function can be implemented
as a single vector instruction by directly microprogramming
its AA into a single instruction and hard-coding it into the
VCU’s AA storage. In our evaluation, however, the nonlinear functions are implemented as a RISC-V program using
multiple vfmul and vfadd instructions to avoid introducing nonstandard instructions to the ISA. Note that while FloatAP
is compatible with a lookup table (LuT)-based activation
approximation [32], [33] that other PIM designs tend to use,
we choose not to do so because storing the pre-calculated
values in SRAM consumes too much area, whereas if in
DRAM it entails extra data movement.
IV. F LOATAP A RCHITECTURE
A. Propagation Chain Microarchitecture
We build FloatAP on top of the CAPE framework [11],
[12], [35], [50] in Fig. 3, the state-of-the-art SRAM-based bitsliced AP. Originally, CAPE’s chain was designed for 32-bit

