Tag Bus

Exponents

…

Mantissa22

Mantissa2

Mantissa0

Mantissa1

…
(a) The one-hop backward paths (red dashed) to support right-shift

Tag Bus
4 extra columns

Sign

Exp7

…

Exp1

Mts22

…

Mts0

…

Propagation Bus
Comparand Bus

(b) The 32-bit FP propagation chain: four extra columns in the most significant exponent subarray;
exponent and mantissa can operate in parallel thanks to the separate comparand and propagation bus

Fig. 7. FloatAP’s modifications to the chain microarchitecture.
TABLE II: The time complexity of FloatAP vs. CAPE. Original CAPE does
not support FP, so we map the best existing PIM-FP algorithm [28] to it.
RISC-V Inst.
vfredsum.vs
vfadd.vv
vfmul.vv
vfdot.vv

FloatAP
e+4m+10
4e+7m+18
5m+2
5e+m2 +3m+13

CAPE-FP
e+1.5m2 +0.5m+9
4e+1.5m2 +8.5m+4
4e+6m2 +11m
9e+7.5m2 +11.5m+9

integers and every chain contains 32 subarrays. Thus, singleprecision FP values (FP32) can be naturally bit-sliced and
stored in the CAPE chain. The sign will be stored in Bit31 ,
the 8-bit exponent in Bit30 to Bit23 , and mantissa in Bit22
to Bit0 . 16-bit formats such as half-precision (FP16, 5-bit
exponent, 10-bit mantissa) and bfloat16 (BF16, 8-bit exponent,
7-bit mantissa) [48] can also reside in the chain despite only
utilizing the second half of the chain (we address this later).
For double-precision (FP64), FloatAP can accommodate it
using two vector registers, each storing the higher and lower
32 bits. We adopt the following modifications to the integer
chain to support the FP operations described in Sec. III.
1) Mantissa Subarrays: 1brsh requires a subarray to selectively update rows based on the tag bits of its left neighbor. So
we add an extra one-hop rightward tag path for every mantissa
subarray, shown as red dashed lines in Fig. 7(a), which feeds
the tag bits of a subarray to its right neighbor’s mux.
2) Exponent Subarrays: align entails searching a specific
8-bit key across the entire exponent field. For each row, the tag
bit is marked as 1 only if all bits match. However, since the
exponent is bit-sliced, this operation will necessitate one of the
exponent subarrays temporarily storing a copy of the searched
exponent in a contiguous data layout. Thus, we widen one
of the exponent subarrays by several columns, i.e., the green
region in Fig. 7(b). Every subarray already has 4 metadata
columns [12], all free during exponent search. So we only
need 4 extra columns because we focus on FP32 or narrower
formats in this work. For FP64 it will need 7 extra columns.
Apart from the above two mandatory modifications, we
propose two optional enhancements that can fully exploit
the concurrency among subarrays to boost the performance.
Chain Splitting for 16 bits – BF16 and FP16 are prevalent

in ML inference. Thus, FloatAP supports chain splitting to
utilize the second half of the chain for FP16 and BF16.
Specifically, the CSB’s maximum vector length is doubled for
16-bit formats. The second half of the vector will be bit-sliced
and stored in the second half of the chain. Both half-chains
can then simultaneously perform the same operation on the
first and second half of the vector. To support chain splitting,
Subarray14 needs four extra columns for the exponent search
in the second half-chain. Subarray25 to Subarray23 , which
store the exponent for FP32 and BF16, are repurposed for
mantissa for FP16. Thus, they need the one-hop rightward tag
path as well. Tri-state buffers are needed to separate the tag
bus at the midpoint so that both half-chains can utilize the tag
bus simultaneously. However, there is no need to duplicate
chain controllers or command buses since the two half-chains
perform exactly the same operation at every cycle. Last, we
incorporate an extra reduction tree for the second half-chain
to maximize the vfdot and vfmul performance.
Exponent-Mantissa Concurrency – As discussed in III-A,
each iteration in align searches a specific value across exponent and performs 1brsh to mantissa. Thus, the exponent
search can be overlapped with the last mantissa update in the
previous iteration. As we store the contiguous copy of the
exponent in metadata columns, this enhancement involves no
hardware cost because, as Fig. 7(b) shows, the original CAPE
chain already separates the command buses for the metadata
(blue) and the data columns (brown). This optimization can
reduce the mantissa alignment time complexity to O(3m)
cycles. Table II shows that after this optimization, the time
complexity of vfredsum, vfadd, and vfdot becomes (e+4m+10),
(4e+7m+18), and (5e+m2 +3m+13), respectively.
B. FloatAP Architecture
A FloatAP core adopts the same organization as CAPE,
shown in Fig. 3(a). One can instantiate FloatAP cores and
integrate them into a system in various ways. In our evaluation,
we envision FloatAP as a loosely coupled accelerator with a
large number of cores and its own DRAM system. Each AP
core is an independent PE and works on an exclusive partition
of the problem. FloatAP cores do not have caches for the
CSBs, nor do CSBs act like caches.4 Instead, they are the
end consumers and producers of the data and access DRAM
directly using vector loads/stores. For the frequently-used data,
such as weights, the program can load them into CSB once
and keep them there for an extended period of time.
ISA and Software Stack – We program FloatAP using the
FP instructions in RISC-V’s standard vector extension [14].
Table II summarizes the corresponding RISC-V vector instructions of the operations we introduced in Sec. III. As
we mentioned, the mantissa-to-integer conversion is performed
right after a vector is loaded. Note that, apart from the ones
in the table, FloatAP also supports all the non-FP vector
instructions of CAPE. In this work, we manually implement
4 The CP of each FloatAP core does have a tiny private I/D cache. However,
it does not share data with CSB.

