Fusion-3D: Integrated Ac
Reconstruction and R

Sixu Li, Yang Zhao, Chaojian Li, Bow
Zhifan Ye, Cheng Wan

School of Com
Georgia Institut
Atlanta, G
{sli941, celine.li
Abstract—Recent breakthroughs in Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) based 3D reconstruction and rendering have spurred the
possibility of immersive experiences in augmented and virtual
reality (AR/VR). However, current NeRF acceleration techniques
are still inadequate for real-world AR/VR applications due to:
1) the lack of end-to-end pipeline acceleration support, which
causes impractical off-chip bandwidth demands for edge devices,
and 2) limited scalability in handling large-scale scenes. To tackle
these limitations, we have developed an end-to-end, scalable
3D acceleration framework called Fusion-3D, capable of instant
scene reconstruction and real-time rendering. Fusion-3D achieves
these goals through two key innovations: 1) an optimized end-toend processor for all three stages of the NeRF pipeline, featuring
dynamic scheduling and hardware-aware sampling in the first
stage, and a shared, reconfigurable pipeline with mixed-precision
arithmetic in the second and third stages; 2) a multi-chip architecture for handling large-scale scenes, integrating a three-level
hierarchical tiling scheme that minimizes inter-chip communication and balances workloads across chips. Extensive experiments
validate the effectiveness of Fusion-3D in facilitating real-time,
energy-efficient 3D reconstruction and rendering. Specifically,
we tape out a prototype chip in 28nm CMOS to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed end-to-end processor. Extensive
simulation based on the on-silicon measurements demonstrates
a 2.5→ and 6→ throughput improvement in training and inference, respectively, compared to state-of-the-art accelerators.
Furthermore, to assess the multi-chip architecture, we integrate
four chips into a single PCB as a prototype. Further simulation
results show that the multi-chip system achieves a 7.3→ and 6.5→
throughput improvement in training and inference, respectively,
over the Nvidia 2080Ti GPU. To the best of our knowledge,
Fusion-3D is the first to achieve both instant (↑ 2 seconds) 3D
reconstruction and real-time (↓ 30 FPS) rendering, while only
requiring the bandwidth of the most commonly used USB port
(0.625 GB/s, 5 Gbps) in edge devices for off-chip communication.
Index Terms—Neural Rendering, VLSI, Accelerator.

I. I NTRODUCTION
3D reconstruction from sparsely sampled 2D images of
a scene is a foundational task in numerous augmented and
virtual reality (AR/VR) applications, as shown in Fig. 1 [48].
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have emerged as the stateof-the-art (SOTA) method for 3D reconstruction, thanks to
their photorealistic rendering quality [28], [45]. Another advantage of NeRFs is their relatively small storage footprint,
approximately 10 MB of parameters [13], [28], which is
notably smaller than traditional methods such as point cloud

