2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)

HyperTEE: A Decoupled TEE Architecture with
Secure Enclave Management
Yunkai Bai† , Peinan Li†* , Yubiao Huang† , Michael C. Huang‡ , Shijun Zhao† ,
Lutan Zhao† , Fengwei Zhang§ , Dan Meng† , Rui Hou†*
2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) | 979-8-3503-5057-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00018

†

Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
and School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Email: {baiyunkai, lipeinan,
huangyubiao, zhaoshijun, zhaolutan, mengdan, hourui}@iie.ac.cn, * Corresponding author: Rui Hou and Peinan Li
†
University of Rochester. Email: michael.huang@rochester.edu
§
Southern University of Science and Technology. Email: zhangfw@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract—Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) architectures
have been deployed in various commercial processors to provide secure environments for confidential programs and data.
However, as a relatively new feature against security threats,
existing designs still face a number of problems. Exploiting the
management vulnerabilities, attackers can disclose secrets via
controlled-channel or micro-architecture side-channel attacks.
To address these problems, this paper proposes a novel TEE
architecture, named HyperTEE. In our architecture, enclave
management tasks are decoupled from the original computing
subsystem to a dedicated, physically isolated Enclave Management Subsystem (EMS). A properly architected EMS prevents
current management vulnerabilities and offers more secure enclave communication. We implemented the HyperTEE prototype
on the FPGA platform. Experiments show that HyperTEE only
introduces less than 1% area overhead, and 2.0% and 1.9%
performance overhead on average for enclaves and non-enclave
workloads, respectively.

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF SECURITY RISKS .
Attack Enclave
Management Tasks
Compromise Confidentiality
Yes
Compromise Integrity
Yes
Compromise Availability
Yes
Security Threats

Attack Type 1: Microarchitectural side-channel attacks.
In modern TEEs, management tasks are executed within an
environment that is logically isolated but physically shared
with untrusted environment. This exposes them to various
microarchitectural side channels [8]–[24]. With these vulnerabilities, attackers can obtain critical keys in SGX attestation
management tasks. Recent TDX design is also vulnerable to
such threats. Generally, disclosure of sensitive data within
individual enclaves just compromises their own confidentiality,
but disclosure of attestation key of management task poses far
more severe threats to the entire platform beyond confidentiality compromises. Such disclosure might allow attackers to:
① compromise integrity by tampering with enclave binaries,
enabling it to bypass attestation check and thus carry out malicious operations. In contrast, merely breaching confidentiality
of enclave themselves results in information leakage but can
not cause malicious operations on them. ② compromise system
availability by falsely declaring the platform untrustworthy to
users, preventing the launch of any enclaves.
Attack Type 2: Controlled-channel attacks. In prevalent commercial TEE designs, enclave management tasks
are deployed in untrusted operating systems (SGX) or hypervisors (SEV). This exposes opportunities for privileged
attackers to exploit management tasks and take control over
enclave execution, giving rise to numerous exploits known as
controlled-channel attacks [25]–[33]. For instance, privileged
attackers can disclose sensitive data of enclaves by observing
three types of events in memory management: ① Allocationbased attacks: monitor on-demand memory allocation requests
from enclaves [32]; ② Page table management-based attacks:
compromise and observe access/dirty states in page table
entry [25]–[31]; ③ Page swapping-based attacks: swap out

I. I NTRODUCTION
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is a crucial CPU
security feature with widespread commercial adoption, including Intel SGX [1], [2] and TDX [3], AMD SEV [4],
[5], ARM TrustZone [6], and CCA [7]. Its design goal is to
establish a secure environment (enclave) dedicated to the protection of sensitive programs and data. Despite its increasing
popularity, TEE remains a relatively new feature and is set
against evolving security threats. As a result, it requires further
enhancements to achieve robust security.
In TEEs, there are two categories of tasks: enclave management tasks and enclaves themselves. Typically, attacks
targeting enclave themselves involve analysis on control flows
and the deduction of secrets, which just compromises confidentiality. In contrast, attacks on management tasks pose significantly more severe security risks, as listed in Table I. Such
attacks not only breach confidentiality but also undermines
integrity through undetected modifications to enclave codes
and data. Furthermore, they can compromise the availability of
the entire TEE by intentionally justifying legitimate enclaves
as untrustworthy and preventing their execution. Therefore, it
is necessary to improve the security of enclave management
tasks. Numerous attacks on management tasks have been
revealed and they can be classified into two types:

979-8-3503-5057-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00018

Attack Enclaves
Themselves
Yes
No
No

105

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 21,2025 at 09:18:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

