ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands Hansung Kim, Ruohan Richard Yan, Joshua You, Tieliang Vamber Yang, Yakun Sophia Shao

Ampere-style
Virgo
0
100
200
SoC Active Power Breakdown (mW)

L2 Cache
L1 Cache
Shared Mem
Vortex Core
Accum Mem
Matrix Unit
DMA & Other

Ampere-style

6.3

Virgo
0

100 200 300 400
SoC Active Energy Breakdown (uJ)

Figure 12. FlashAttention-3 active power and energy breakdown.

6.2

file as discussed in Section 6.1.2, the core power consumption is reduced for Virgo, substituted with the matrix unit
power operating at a higher utilization. Compounded with
the shorter overall runtime of the kernel, the overall energy
consumption of the kernel is reduced by 50.6% compared to
the Ampere-style baseline.

FlashAttention-3 Kernel

We perform a similar analysis of performance, power and
energy for the FlashAttention-3 kernel [37], whose mapping
to Virgo is described in Sections 4.5 and 5.3. We compare
Virgo against the Ampere-style design with tightly-coupled
matrix units and an integrated DMA. For the Ampere-style
design, the kernel mapping adopts the warp specialization
and ping-pong scheduling approach detailed in [37], where
the 8 warps within a core are divided into two groups of 4,
with GEMM and softmax computations scheduled alternately
across the two warp groups. Although the Ampere-style
matrix unit lacks single-warp asynchronous execution, it can
still co-execute alongside SIMT vector units across different
warps, provided the warp scheduler can find eligible warps
to concurrently multi-thread.
Performance & Utilization. We observe a total MAC utilization of 65.7% for Virgo, a significant increase over 35.1%
for the Ampere-style baseline. The higher utilization is explained by the disaggregated design enabling more efficient
allocation of core pipeline resources to non-matrix computations. Since matrix computations are offloaded to a disaggregated hardware, a single warp, after asynchronously initiating the GEMM operation, can reallocate all of its pipeline
resources such as instruction slots and register file space to
softmax computation. In contrast, the tightly-coupled matrix
unit operates through synchronous, fine-grained instructions, meaning that both matrix and softmax instructions
need to compete for instruction issue slots and limited register file ports at every cycle. This leads to suboptimal parallelism compared to the disaggregated design.
Power & Energy. We plot the active SoC-level power
and energy consumptions of the two designs in Figure 12.
As a result of fusing matrix operations with SIMT operations, the core power constitutes more than 50% of the total
power for both designs. However, due to the larger operation
granularity and offloading of data delivery from the register

Multiple Heterogeneous Matrix Units

The disaggregation of matrix units and parameterized memory system of Virgo allows scaling to multiple matrix units
within a cluster. We showcase a configuration where we integrate two differently sized matrix units in one cluster, and
map two differently sized GEMMs on them: a 256×256×256
GEMM onto the large unit, and a 128×128×128 GEMM onto
the small unit. When the two GEMMs run in parallel, we
achieve a utilization of 59.5%, compared to 59.7% when they
are run separately in serial. The active power when normalized by FLOP increased by only 4.3% for the parallel case.
The minimal performance degradation and power overhead
demonstrates the scalability of Virgo’s design.

7

Conclusion

We introduce Virgo, a novel GPU architecture that integrates
matrix units at the cluster level. By physically disaggregating the matrix unit from the core pipeline, Virgo overcomes
scalability and energy efficiency limitations in the current
core-coupled GPU designs. This approach enables a heterogeneous GPU architecture optimized for DNN workloads,
where SIMT cores and matrix hardware are decoupled for
improved scalability while also supporting concurrent execution through efficient command and memory coordination.
We implement and evaluate our design using synthesizable RTL, which shows significant power and energy efficiency improvement for GEMM operations. Furthermore,
the decoupled architecture in conjunction with our programming model enables efficient mapping to fused DNN kernels,
enabling new strategies for applications mapping.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our shepherd Joseph L. Greathouse,
the anonymous reviewers and artifact evaluators for their
valuable feedback. We would also like to thank Amir Gholami
for providing access to a server with NVIDIA GPUs that we
used to characterize GEMM kernels. Lastly, we extend our
sincere thanks to Kostadin Ilov for his management of the
compute servers we used for development.
This research was partially funded by NSF Awards 2303735
and 2238346, as well as by SLICE Lab industrial sponsors
and affiliates. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed
or implied, of the U.S. Government.

