ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands Hansung Kim, Ruohan Richard Yan, Joshua You, Tieliang Vamber Yang, Yakun Sophia Shao

Cluster
SIMT Core

SIMT Core

FPU

ALU

FPU

ALU

Tensor Core
Register File
L1 $

Shared
Memory

• We demonstrate that Virgo, when synthesized using a
commercial 16nm process, significantly reduces active
power consumption by 67.3% and 24.2% compared to
the Ampere and Hopper-style core-coupled baselines,
and energy consumption by 80.3% and 32.5%.

Virgo Cluster

Warps

Lanes

TC

SIMT Core
Lanes

Matrix Unit

Lanes

Accumulator Memory

SIMT Core
TC

SIMT Core
Lanes

SIMT Core

Lanes

Matrix

Matrix

Shared LLC

(a) GPU Cluster with
Tensor Cores.

2

SIMT Core
TC

Lanes
SIMT Core

Matrix

PE
Array

Lanes

Shared
Memory

Matrix

Matrix Data

Matrix

Shared LLC

(b) GPU Cluster with
Disaggregated Matrix Unit.

Figure 1. Overview of (a) today’s GPU architecture with
tightly coupled integration of Tensor Cores (TC), compared
to (b) Virgo’s cluster-level integration of matrix units.
units, receiving data through the register file via the standard instruction datapath. This tightly coupled integration
faces significant limitations in terms of operation size due
to the capacity and bandwidth constraints of the register
file. Consequently, core-coupled matrix units support finegrained operations, commonly with tile sizes such as 16 ×
8 [35, 39]. Such a small granularity of operation not only
limits data reuse, but also requires processing a large number
of instructions in the core pipeline, consuming substantial
energy and power in instruction scheduling and address
generation, rather than in actual computation.
To address these challenges, we propose Virgo, a novel
GPU architecture that integrates dedicated matrix units at
the cluster level (Figure 1). The cornerstone of Virgo is the
physical disaggregation of the matrix unit from the core
microarchitecture, eliminating scalability constraints and
increasing matrix operation granularity. Virgo improves
system-level energy efficiency through reducing instruction
processing, eliminating redundant register file accesses, and
increasing data reuse. Key contributions of our work are:
• We propose a novel cluster-level matrix unit integration methodology for GPUs that enhances scalability
and efficiency by disaggregating the accelerator from
the SIMT core.
• We fully implement the GPU designs featuring not
only the proposed cluster-level integration, but also
baseline core-coupled integrations that model Volta,
Ampere and Hopper Tensor Cores, in synthesizable
RTL. We develop the corresponding software programming interface as well. Virgo is fully open sourced. 1
1 RTL: https://github.com/ucb-bar/virgo, kernels: https://github.com/ucb-

bar/virgo-kernels.

Background and Motivation

This section provides an overview of the GPU and Tensor
Core microarchitectures, highlighting the scalability and efficiency limitations caused by the tight coupling of the matrix
unit to the SIMT core. This discussion motivates Virgo’s key
design decision to integrate matrix units at the cluster level,
addressing architectural bottlenecks and aligning with the
increasing demands of modern GPU applications.
2.1

GPU Cluster Microarchitecture

Figure 1(a) shows the modern GPU microarchitecture, featuring multiple clusters of SIMT cores connected to a shared
last-level cache. Each SIMT core consists of a warp scheduler,
a register file, and tightly-coupled execution units like Tensor
Cores. Within each cluster, SIMT cores are interconnected
via a cluster-level network-on-chip to the shared memory, a
software-managed scratchpad.
The clustered organization offers several benefits. First, it
increases hardware parallelism by allowing multiple cores in
a cluster to execute independent warp instructions simultaneously. Second, it enables increased data sharing within the
kernel, as a greater number of threads across the SIMT cores
can share data through the shared memory. This clusterbased architecture is widely adopted in the industry, known
as Streaming Multiprocessors in NVIDIA GPUs [16], Compute
Units in AMD CDNA architecture [1] and 𝑋 𝑒 -cores in Intel
𝑋 𝑒 -HPG architecture [26].
Importantly, the cluster serves as the hardware unit to
which a thread block or a workgroup is assigned, which is
a group of SIMT threads that provides software primitives
for shared memory access and barrier synchronization [22].
With modern workloads like large language models (LLMs)
requiring increasingly large GEMM operations, there is a
growing need for improved data reuse at the shared memory
level. This necessity motivates the rationale for integrating
matrix units at the cluster level, a key principle that guides
the development of the Virgo system.
2.2

State-of-the-art Tensor Core Integration

To meet the rapidly increasing compute demand of deep
learning applications, NVIDIA introduced dedicated matrix
units known as Tensor Cores in the Volta architecture [13].
Tensor Core consists of multiple SIMD-parallel dot product units designed for high-throughput multiply-add operations in matrix multiplication [34]. As shown in Figure 1(a),
Tensor Cores receive matrix operands directly through the
register file of the SIMT core, similar to other execution

