Virgo: Cluster-level Matrix Unit Integration in GPUs for Scalability and Energy Efficiency

4.5.1 Synchronization Overhead. To maximize overlap
and achieve high utilization in the mapping scheme described, the synchronization between the core and the matrix
unit must have minimal overhead. To assess this, we measure the cycle times the core spends in the busy register
polling loop within the virgo_fence operation. On average,
this interval is 260 cycles, which accounts for 2.4% of the
total runtime. This indicates that the kernel exploits high
instruction-level parallelism, as all remaining cycles overlap
matrix operations with SIMT computations.
The synchronization overhead also depends on the pipelining scheme used for the workload and its throughput-matching
behavior. In our experiment, the softmax execution completes slightly earlier than the GEMM. In workloads where
pipeline throughputs are ideally matched, or where the matrix computation completes first, the synchronization overhead can be lower than what we measure.

5

Methodology

In this section, we outline how we implement both our proposed microarchitecture and the baseline GPU designs in
RTL, and then set up experiments for evaluation.
5.1

Baseline GPU Designs

We first describe how we implement the baseline GPU designs that feature core-coupled integration methods of matrix unit. We continue to follow the classification we established in Section 2.5, and focus on how to faithfully model
each of the design points. This allows us to better evaluate
our design in a way that achieves separation of concerns
without conflating multiple design considerations at play.
5.1.1 Volta-style Tightly-coupled Design. The Voltastyle design features matrix units tightly coupled to the core’s
register file. For its implementation, we closely refer to the
microarchitecture proposed in [34], whose timing behavior is correlated with the NVIDIA GPU. The microarchitecture features SIMD-parallel dot-product units, composed of
floating-point units in a tree-reduction configuration, that
execute multiply-and-accumulate (MAC) operations on the
input tile fragments. As a result of tight coupling, the tile
fragments are directly supplied from the register file via core
pipeline, and the result fragments are written back to the
register file as well.
We extend the Vortex RISC-V ISA to control the matrix
unit, modeling Volta’s HMMA SASS instructions. Specifically, a single tile operation is split into finer-grained set and
step instructions, sequenced to perform the inner and outer
products of the input tile fragments. It is worth noting that
the Ampere and Hopper Tensor Cores manage the sequencing of sets and steps at the microarchitecture level [34, 39],
reducing the overall instruction count. We model this mechanism in the Hopper-style baseline as well.

To SMEM

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
To RF

From RF
Access

Execute

requests

Address
Gen

State
Machine

C data

responses
Mem
Queue

A Operand
Buffer
Metadata
Queue

Addr A Addr B Reg C Warp ID
Dispatch

From SMEM

A

B

B Operand
Buffer

Dot Product
×
×
+

+
Warp ID

tag

Data
Writeback

Step FSM

Reg C

Figure 6. Microarchitecture of the decoupled Tensor Core,
which models NVIDIA Hopper’s integration scheme of decoupling operand storage to the shared memory [10]. The
decoupled access/execute architecture effectively overlaps
the access latency to the shared memory with compute.

Since our Vortex core configuration has a narrower SIMT
width than Volta (8 vs. 32), we correspondingly scale the
design to achieve full efficiency of the hardware. Specifically,
we instantiate a single octet instance instead of four in the
original design [34]. The tile size of a single wmma instruction is determined by the register file space. As discussed
in Section 3.2.2, Tensor Core operates at a per-warp granularity, and therefore can access the register space SIMTprivatized to each warp, which is 1 KiB in our configuration. This space allows storing two 8×16 FP16 operands and
one 8×8 FP32 accumulator tile, resulting in the tile size of
(m,n,k)=(8,8,16). The available read bandwidth from the
register file limits the number of FP16 MACs per unit to 32.
Our resulting Tensor Core implementation maintains the
same timing behavior of 2 cycles per HMMA step instruction
as in Volta, along with an identical Tensor-to-SIMT FLOPS
ratio of 4:1.
5.1.2 Ampere-style Tightly-coupled Design with DMA.
The Ampere-style baseline features tightly-coupled matrix
units and a dedicated DMA incorporated into the GPU. To
model this baseline, we use an identical matrix unit module as the Volta-style baseline, but additionally instantiate a
DMA unit described in Section 3.2.4.
Note that publicly available information does not explicitly
confirm whether the Ampere architecture includes a dedicated DMA engine similar to Hopper [15]. However, to more
clearly isolate the impact of different design components
in our evaluation, we introduce DMA in the Ampere-style
design and incrementally incorporate operand decoupling
in the Hopper-style design.
5.1.3 Hopper-style Operand-decoupled Design. The
Hopper-style baseline enhances the matrix unit design by
enabling direct access to operand matrix data from shared
memory, while accumulator data continues to be both read
from and written to the register file [17]. To implement this

