Virgo: Cluster-level Matrix Unit Integration in GPUs for Scalability and Energy Efficiency

GPU

V100

A100

H100

Architecture
Tensor FP16 TFLOPS
CUDA FP32 TFLOPS
# of Tensor Cores (TC)
MACs per TC

Volta
1x
1x
1x
64

Ampere
2.5x
1.2x
0.7x
256

Hopper
7.9x
4.3x
0.8x
512

Register usage (max. 255)
Warp occupancy

224
12.5%

221
10.0%

168
14.1%

Table 1. Scaling trends of the compute capabilities of
NVIDIA datacenter GPUs across generations, and occupancy
statistics of CUTLASS GEMM kernels on them. The multiplyaccumulate (MAC) units per Tensor Core is analytically estimated from FLOPS using the clock frequency. For the kernel
statistics, we profile s884gemm_f16*, s16816gemm_f16* and
sm90*_s64x128x16gemm_f16* for V100/A100/H100, and
compute the average across five kernel parameter combinations with the highest FLOPS for each architecture.

units such as the floating-point unit and the load/store unit.
Essentially, today’s Tensor Core is a specialized execution
unit for matrix multiplication that is tightly coupled into
the execution pipeline of the SIMT core. Prior efforts have
focused on improving the Tensor Core design in sparsity support [20, 25, 44] and generalized operations [40, 48], while
maintaining the core-coupled integration.
Notably, Tensor Core has been rapidly increasing in its
compute capabilities. Table 1 outlines the evolution of NVIDIA
datacenter GPUs across generations [13, 14, 16]. The FP16
throughput of Tensor Cores has improved at a rate surpassing that of FP32 throughput in CUDA cores. This increase
in throughput is not due to an increase in the number of
Tensor Cores, but rather to each Tensor Core instance growing larger in size. This trend underscores the need to scale
up the individual capabilities of the matrix units for future
generations of GPUs.
2.3

Limitations of the Core-Coupled Approach

However, the tightly core-coupled nature of today’s Tensor
Core design poses significant challenges to further scaling of
the matrix unit. First, modern GEMM kernels generate high
register pressure as they require extensive use of register file
space to store multiple input and accumulator data [28]. This
issue is compounded in kernels that utilize dedicated matrix
units, where the entire input and accumulator matrix tiles
must be stored within the register file, significantly increasing the register usage. As a result, this leads to decreased
kernel occupancy or frequent register spills to stack memory
in Tensor Core-accelerated GEMM kernels, as reported in
previous studies [7, 41, 43, 45, 47]. Our characterization of
CUTLASS GEMM kernels [28] confirms this as well, where
high register usage significantly limits warp occupancy of the

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

kernel (Table 1). Efforts like INTERPRET [30] and Duplo [29]
are developed to reduce duplicated data in the register file,
alleviating capacity constraints.
Furthermore, the tight coupling to the SIMT core’s register
file imposes not only capacity constraints, but also bandwidth
constraints. According to [34], the register read bandwidth
available in the Volta architecture is maximally utilized during Tensor Core operations. Scaling up the operation size
requires increasing register file bandwidth to deliver larger
operand data to the Tensor Core, introducing significant
design challenges.
Due to register file constraints, core-coupled matrix unit
designs typically support fine-grained operations. For example, the NVIDIA Tensor Cores handle tile sizes of 16 × 8 ×
16 for FP16 input operands in the MMA instruction [17];
similarly, AMD CDNA2 Matrix Cores supports sizes of 16 ×
16 × 16 and 32 × 32 × 8 in the MFMA instruction [35]. These
small tile sizes incur additional data transfers from the backing memory due to limited reuse. Additionally, they require
processing a large number of instructions and computing
extra tile memory addresses to complete the GEMM operation, leading to significant energy and power consumptions
in hardware components beyond the matrix unit, including
the instruction scheduling logic, ALU, and the register file.

2.4

Recent Advances and Remaining Challenges

Recent industry GPU designs have made advancements in addressing the efficiency and scalability challenges of the corecoupled approach described above. Namely, NVIDIA Ampere Tensor Core introduces Asynchronous Data Copy [15],
which adds hardware acceleration for transferring data data
directly from the global memory to the shared memory,
bypassing the core’s register file. By offloading data copy
operations from the core, resource usage within the core
pipeline—such as register files and instruction slots—is reduced, enabling more efficient allocation of such resources
to matrix operations. Additionally, this offloading enables
asynchronous overlapping of data movement and compute,
improving efficiency compared relying solely on warp concurrency. In our profiling of CUTLASS, we observe 36% less
warp stalls in the async-copy-enabled GEMM kernels, which
led to 22% increase in issue slot utilization.
Building upon Ampere, NVIDIA’s Hopper Tensor Core,
introduced in 2022, further alleviates register pressure with
the introduction of the wgmma operation. This new mode of
operation enables the Tensor Cores to read matrix operands
directly from shared memory, reducing dependency on the
register file [16, 32]. This new operand delivery method mitigates the need to store the matrix data in the register file,
alleviating the scalability limitation. This is evidenced by the
significant decrease in register usage that enabled further
scale-up of MACs in Hopper, shown in Table 1.

