ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands Hansung Kim, Ruohan Richard Yan, Joshua You, Tieliang Vamber Yang, Yakun Sophia Shao

accounts for 5.5% of the area and 6.8% of the power consumption in the SoC. Also, compared to a baseline design that
does not support Gemmini connection, the shared memory
area only increases by 9.6%.
3.2.2 Accumulator Memory. Virgo’s disaggregated matrix unit features a dedicated SRAM memory for storing
accumulator matrix data, also shown in Figure 2. Equipping
the matrix unit with a dedicated accumulator memory is an
important design choice we make for two reasons.
First, this design enables providing the matrix units with
a large accumulator data storage without impacting parallelism of the kernel. GPU’s register file space is privatized
across different warps in the core, establishing the SIMT abstraction. Because core-coupled matrix units such as Tensor
Cores accumulate data and return the result also through
the SIMT registers, scaling up the matrix units increases perwarp register usage, and results in higher register pressure
and decreased occupancy of the kernel (see also Table 1).
While lower occupancy does not always lead to lower matrix
FLOPS, it may affect the performance of fused DNN kernels where the activation compute has to run with reduced
thread-level parallelism. In contrast, providing matrix units
with access to a separate accumulator memory without SIMT
privatization decouples the issue of register pressure from
the size of matrix compute, and allows the hardware designer
to scale up matrix units without worrying its impact to the
overall kernel performance.
Second, regular access patterns to the accumulator data
enables a simpler and more energy-efficient memory design. Unlike the register file, which must support divergent
scatter-gather SIMT accesses, matrix units perform wide
and contiguous accesses to the accumulator data. This enables a straightforward SRAM implementation—specifically,
the Virgo unit employs a single-banked SRAM, reducing
hardware complexity and lowering energy consumption per
access. We present quantitative results in Section 6.1.2.
3.2.3 Memory coalescer. Memory coalescing [18] plays a
crucial role in GPU memory systems by converting scalar
SIMT memory accesses into wide, vectorized accesses, and
thereby achieving high effective memory throughput. At the
onset of the project, Vortex had lacked hardware support
for memory coalescing, significantly limiting the memory
bandwidth of SIMT load and store instructions. To this end,
we implemented a custom memory coalescing unit as shown
in Figure 2. The coalescer monitors the core’s SIMT memory
accesses at the core and L1 cache interface, and opportunistically merges them into wider memory requests of the same
size as the L1 cache line. The coalescer significantly increased
data delivery rate from the global memory (i.e. DRAM, L2
and L1) to the cores, and improved utilization of the matrix
units. Note that the coalescer is used for the Tightly-Coupled,
Volta-style configuration (Section 2.5), which utilizes SIMT
instructions for data delivery instead of a DMA.

3.2.4 Efficient Data Movement with DMA. We further
facilitate efficient data delivery to the matrix units beyond
what memory coalescing provides by incorporating a dedicated DMA engine. Hardware-accelerated data movement
is becoming increasingly common in modern GPU designs.
The NVIDIA Ampere architecture introduces Asynchronous
Data Copy to accelerate direct memory transfers between
global and shared memory [15], while the Hopper architecture features a dedicated TMA engine that supports flexible
address generation modes [16]. In our models of Amperestyle and Hopper-style Tensor Core systems, as well as in
Virgo, we include a MMIO-programmable DMA engine in
the cluster dedicated to issuing direct memory accesses between global memory and shared memory. Additionally in
Virgo, the same DMA is capable of drawing from the matrix
unit’s accumulator memory as well, depicted in Figure 2.
3.3

Cluster-wide Synchronization

As will be discussed in Section 4, the SIMT cores in a cluster
work together collaboratively to either move matrix data to
the matrix unit, or do post-processing computation on the
resulting matrix from the unit. This requires an efficient synchronization mechanism across the cores to be implemented
at the entire cluster level.
To this end, we design a lightweight synchronizer module in the cluster that interfaces with the warp scheduler
of each SIMT core. When a designated set of warps reach a
barrier instruction in the kernel, the warp scheduler issues
a barrier release request to the synchronizer. The synchronizer collects requests from other cores in the cluster, and
replies once receiving requests from all cores, ensuring every
core participates in the barrier. We reuse Vortex’s vx_bar
instruction to allow the programmer to specify which warps
participate in a particular barrier, and be able to use multiple
barriers in the kernel.

4

Virgo Programming Model

As a result of architectural disaggregation from the core,
the matrix unit in Virgo operates as a separate thread of
execution from the SIMT cores. In this section, we establish a programming model that enables the programmer to
efficiently coordinate the matrix unit and the SIMT cores,
based on two principles: (1) an asynchronous programming
interface and (2) collaborative execution of warps.
4.1

Asynchronous Matrix Unit Interface

Virgo exposes an asynchronous programming interface to
allow the programmer to flexibly overlap SIMT core compute concurrently to the matrix operations. As discussed in
Section 3.1, the Gemmini-based matrix unit in Virgo exposes
a memory-mapped IO interface to the core. The accesses
to the MMIO interface are non-blocking, such that a single

