ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands Hansung Kim, Ruohan Richard Yan, Joshua You, Tieliang Vamber Yang, Yakun Sophia Shao

However, the Hopper Tensor Core does not fully solve the
register pressure issue, and energy efficiency remains a concern. The wgmma instruction, while reducing some register
load, still accumulates the partial sum matrices back to the
register file [17], generating significant register pressure (Table 1). Furthermore, the Tensor Core still remains physically
coupled to the SIMT core [16, 32], preventing data sharing
across matrix units that could otherwise be achieved in a
large, unified matrix unit design.
Virgo fundamentally address the scalability and energy
efficiency challenges by completely disaggregating the matrix unit from the SIMT cores, establishing it as a separate
instance at the cluster level. To the best of our knowledge,
Virgo is the first effort to integrate a matrix unit at the core
cluster. Through disaggregation, Virgo completely bypasses
the core’s register file for operand and accumulator storage, eliminating its scalability constraints. It also reduces
energy consumption in the register file, by offloading data
access directly to the shared memory or a separate, energyefficient accumulator memory. Finally, the disaggregation
also enables a unified matrix unit design, which maximizes
data reuse across processing elements compared to separate,
per-core configuration.
2.5

Terminology and Modeling

To facilitate further discussion, we define a terminology that
corresponds to the integration methods described above.
This classification allows us to separate different design concerns and facilitate a fair evaluation of our design. Section 5
details how we model each of these design points.
• Tightly-Coupled Matrix Unit refers to the traditional design where the matrix unit is integrated within
the SIMT core, heavily relying on the register file for
both operand and result data delivery. The NVIDIA
Volta Tensor Core is an example of this design.
• The Tightly-Coupled Matrix Unit can be extended with
a dedicated DMA, enabling more efficient data delivery from off-chip to on-chip memory. This configuration corresponds to Ampere, where we assume that
Ampere features a separate DMA engine similar to
Hopper in order to support Asynchronous Data Copy
instructions.
• Operand-Decoupled Matrix Unit allows the matrix
unit to directly source operand data from the shared
memory, but the unit itself remains to be part of the
SIMT core. This configuration resembles Hopper.
• Physically Disaggregated Matrix Unit refers to
Virgo’s design, where the matrix unit is completely separated from the SIMT core and externally integrated
at the cluster, enhancing data reuse and scalability.
For brevity, we also refer to the above terms as Volta-style,
Ampere-style, Hopper-style matrix units and Virgo.

Vortex SIMT Core
Tensor
Core

ALU

FPU

ALU

FPU

DPU

Load/Store
Unit
In Flight

Register
File

In Flight

DPU
DPU

Lane

Lane
DPU

Fetch &
Sched.

Lane
Lane

Coalescer

L1 Data
Cache

Interconnect

Vortex SIMT Core
Tensor
Core

L1 Inst.
Cache
L0 L1 L2 L3

DPU

DPU

Fetch &
Scheduler

L1
I-Cache
Coalescer

Load/
Store
Unit

RF

L1
D-Cache

Shared
Memory
Bank 0

DRAM

L2
Cache

DMA

Accum.
Memory

Main Memory Traffic
Shared Memory Traffic
DMA Traffic

Synchronizer

Virgo
Cluster
Gemmini

Systolic Array

Scratchpad

Bank 1
Bank 2
Bank 3

CoarseGrain FSM

Figure 2. A high level overview of the Virgo microarchitecture. The Gemmini-based matrix unit is disaggregated
out from the SIMT cores into a separate unit in the cluster.
Dashed lines indicate optionally instantiated modules for
evaluation, such as the core-coupled Tensor Core.

3

Virgo Microarchitecture

Virgo aims to improve scalability and energy efficiency by
disaggregating the dedicated matrix unit from the core as
separate hardware at the cluster level, as depicted in Figure 2.
To realize this design, we need to solve several microarchitectural challenges: (1) establishing a command interface
through which the core and the unit can communicate, (2)
designing a cluster-local shared memory interconnect that
efficiently handles concurrent accesses from the core and
the matrix unit, (3) facilitating a more efficient matrix data
movement via a dedicated DMA engine. and (4) implementing a synchronization mechanism across the cores and the
matrix unit. We discuss these components in more detail in
the following subsections.
Before we begin, we mention key open-source hardware
infrastructures that we leverage to realize our design at the
RTL. First, we use Vortex [42], an open-source GPGPU implementation in SystemVerilog that enables the full stack
of both hardware and kernel development by extending the
RISC-V ISA. Second, we use Gemmini [21], a systolic array
generator, to generate the cluster-based matrix unit IP for
Virgo2 . We describe in further detail how we modify these
IPs to establish a full GPU system in Section 5.
3.1

Command Interface to the Matrix Unit

We facilitate the cluster-local interconnect to establish an
efficient memory-mapped IO-based command interface between the core and the matrix unit. The MMIO interface is
2 The name Virgo is inspired by the use of Vortex and Gemmini to achieve

cluster-level integration.

