Virgo: Cluster-level Matrix Unit Integration in GPUs for Scalability and Energy Efficiency
SIMT+Tensor Cores
DMA

L2→SMEM(0)

SIMT Cores,
with Tensor Cores

repeat K times
Store Result

L2→SMEM(k+1)
SMEM→RF

warp 0

GEMM

warp 1

warp 2
warp 3

fence +
barrier

Elem-wise

DMA

L2→SMEM(0)

4.3

GEMM + Accumulate (k)
L2→SMEM(k+1)

Store GEMM Result
Store Activated Result

SIMT Cores

Activate
previous (m,n) Tile

all warps in thread block

Activate

Figure 4. Execution in the SIMT core, matrix unit, and DMA
during a GEMM operation on Virgo and Tensor Core-based
designs.
SIMT warp can kick off a matrix unit operation and then continue to execute the next instructions in the kernel without
stalls. This enables a software-pipelining scheme where the
warp can overlap independent operations such as data movement for the next tile or post-processed activation while the
long-latency matrix operations occur. We will detail how
the programmer can exploit the instruction-level parallelism
through this interface in Sections 4.4 and 4.5.
An asynchronous matrix unit design is common in modern GPU architectures. Notably, the NVIDIA Hopper Tensor
Core [16] and the AMD CDNA2 Matrix Core [2] support
same-warp co-execution of matrix and SIMT vector computations. Without such a mechanism, the SIMT core relies
solely on multithreading across multiple warps to hide the
latency of matrix operations, which requires high warp occupancy to ensure the scheduler always has unblocked warps
for issue. In contrast, the asynchronous interface enables
programmers to exploit instruction-level parallelism within
a single warp, providing additional opportunities for latency
hiding. Virgo particularly benefits from this interface, as its
enhanced scalability supports larger tile sizes, which introduce longer compute latencies to be overlapped.
4.2

The collaborative execution of warps requires the clusterwide synchronization mechanism described in Section 3.3,
because the warps in the thread block may be running in
different cores in the cluster.

fence +
barrier

Virgo: SIMT+Cluster Matrix Unit
repeat K times
Matrix Unit

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Collaborative Execution of Warps

GEMM operation on GPUs require close coordination between the core operation and the dedicated matrix unit
operation, where the core handles data movement operations between the off-chip and on-chip memory, or postprocessing compute on the result matrix such as non-linear
activations in a deep learning workload. Therefore, the SIMT
cores need to achieve adequate throughput that matches
compute throughput of the matrix unit. To this end, in Virgo,
multiple warps collaborate to participate in a single operation of the matrix unit. This is depicted in Figure 4, where all
warps in the thread block works on activating the previous
(M,N) output tile computed by the matrix unit operation.

API Design

Virgo’s application programming interface consists of two
levels: A low-level interface that directly exposes the initiation and synchronization mechanism of the hardware, and
a higher-level library that helps the programmer to express
GEMM computations. The low-level API is composed of the
following operations:
• virgo_dma_{load,store} initiates an asynchronous
DMA operation to copy the tile across the global memory, the shared memory and the accumulator memory
inside the matrix unit. It takes as argument the base
addresses of the tiles, matrix dimensions, and their
memory layout, which configures the DMA for correct addresses generation.
• virgo_compute kicks off the asynchronous matrix
multiply-and-accumulate operation in the matrix unit,
accessing the tile data from the shared memory.
• virgo_fence blocks the warp until all preceding asynchronous operations have completed and their results
are visible to the programmer.
As described in the previous section, these API calls are
used in conjunction with the cluster-wide synchronization
barrier to ensure all participating cores remain synchronized
in relation to the matrix operation.
On top of the low-level API, we provide a library that constructs a full GEMM kernel using tiled matrix multiplication.
The library consists of C++ templates that, given GEMM
dimension constants, instantiates to a concrete kernel specialized to each GEMM size by determining (M,N,K) loop
iterations at compile time. Using the library, the programmer can easily invoke a device-level GEMM kernel without
worrying about the details of mapping to the matrix unit, or
write a fused kernel that includes a GEMM component.
This API design is similar to existing GPU GEMM libraries
such as Composable Kernel [3] or CUTLASS [28], which
similarly construct a hierarchy of API layers on top of the
hardware-dependent, tile-level operators. One difference
is that, in Virgo, the indivisible atom of computation is a
threadblock- or workgroup-level matrix multiplication as a
result of the enlarged tile size, while the other libraries map
to finer-grained operations at the warp or warpgroup-level
atoms. Virgo’s larger compute unit enables more optimal
hardware scheduling decisions while reducing instruction
processing overhead within the core, as discussed in as discussed in Section 6.1.2. However, this approach sacrifices
flexibility for workloads that use smaller matrix dimensions.

