Virgo: Cluster-level Matrix Unit Integration in GPUs for Scalability and Energy Efficiency

Dot-product Unit
Operands Buffer
Result Buffer
Control

Tightly-coupled
(Volta, Ampere)
Operand-decoupled
(Hopper)
Disaggregated
(Virgo)
0

500
1000
1500
2000
Matrix Unit Active Energy Breakdown (uJ)

Systolic Array
Accum Mem
SMEM Interface
Control

Figure 11. Active energy breakdown of the matrix unit for
the 1024×1024 GEMM kernel.

operand delivery also significantly impacts core power. In a
Volta-style tightly-coupled Tensor Core, operand matrices
are accessed by fetching register operands from the register file as encoded in the instruction. Staging the operands
through the register file incurs additional energy compared
to accessing them directly from the shared memory, as both
the Hopper-style and Virgo matrix units do. This design
choice explains the significant reduction in the issue stage
power, which includes register file access power, from the
Ampere-style to Hopper and Virgo figures.
Decoupled accumulation. Although the operands are
offloaded, the Hopper-style operand-decoupled Tensor Core
continues to access accumulator data from the core register file. This explains the nontrivial core issue stage power
consumption in the Hopper-style baseline (Figure 10). In
contrast, Virgo takes an additional step by offloading accumulator data from the register file to a dedicated SRAM-based
accumulator memory. The accumulator memory is singlebanked, unlike the multi-banked register file that needs to
support divergent SIMT accesses, reducing energy consumption per access. In addition, the Virgo matrix unit’s systolic
array architecture allows accumulation to partially occur
within the mesh, reducing the number of accesses to the
memory and further saving power.
Energy consumption in matrix units. Figure 11 shows
the active energy consumption of the matrix unit in isolation. We focus on energy rather than power for the matrix
unit, because energy directly correlates with the total FLOPs
which is kept the same across the designs. The figure does
indicate that energy consumption in the matrix unit, especially within the processing elements (“Dot-product Unit”
and “Systolic Array”), is similar across the designs. The PE
energy is slightly lower for Virgo, due to its use of fused
multiply-add units in the systolic array, which are more
energy-efficient than the separate multipliers and adders
used in Tensor Core’s tree-reduction PEs [34]. However, this
difference in the matrix unit energy is minuscule compared
to the overall system-level energy savings at the SoC (Figure 8). This suggests that Virgo’s advantages in power and

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Tightly-coupled
Operand-decoupled
Disaggregated

Tile
Fragment

Matrix Unit
Design

SMEM Footprint
MiB
Norm.

8×8
16×16
16×16

Per-core
Per-core
Per-cluster

6
4
2.25

2.67
1.78
1.00

Table 4. On-chip shared memory read footprint compared
across the GPU designs. Virgo’s disaggregated matrix unit
improves data reuse by (1) enlarging tile size over the tightlycoupled design, and (2) unifying into a single cluster-level
unit over the operand-decoupled design.

energy efficiency primarily come from the aspects of operation granularity and operand/accumulator offloading, rather
than from choosing a specific design for the matrix unit.
6.1.3 Data Reuse in the Shared Memory. Table 4 lists
the shared memory read footprint for the 256×256×256 GEMM
kernel. “Tile fragment” refers to the amount of matrix data
transferred from shared memory to compute units in a single
access. Its size depends on the backing memory internal to
the matrix unit that stages data between shared memory
and PEs: the operand buffer for both tightly-coupled and
operand-decoupled Tensor Cores, and the systolic array registers for Virgo. Unlike the tightly-coupled design, where
tile size is severely constrained by the register file space,
operand-decoupled and disaggregated designs increase tile
fragment size by offloading operand storage, improving data
reuse as seen in the lower footprint.
More importantly, Virgo further improves data reuse beyond the operand-decoupled design by unifying the matrix
units into a single instance at the cluster level. This unified
design enables data sharing in scenarios where non-unified
Tensor Cores would otherwise duplicate shared memory accesses. Specifically, in GEMM, different Tensor Cores may
compute output tiles along the same row or column. However, due to their physical separation across cores, they must
independently access the input row or column data multiple
times. In contrast, a unified design allows complete reuse
of input matrix data, which explains the further memory
footprint reduction for Virgo compared to the Hopper-style
operand-decoupled design.
This reduction in memory footprint has both performance
and energy implications. We had to scale up the shared memory bandwidth by 2x for Volta and Ampere-style designs
with a more aggressive banking strategy, because otherwise
the matrix unit utilization would be bottlenecked by memory bandwidth. In one configuration, this change increased
utilization from 46.9% to 55.0%. With better data reuse, Virgo
achieved optimal utilization without demanding higher memory bandwidth. Energy-wise, the shared memory in the Virgo
design consumed 41.0% less active energy compared to the
operand-decoupled design.

