HipKittens: Fast and Furious AMD Kernels
HipKittens: Fast and Furious AMD Kernels
William Hu, Drew Wadsworth, Sean Siddens, Stanley Winata, Daniel Y. Fu, Ryan Swann, Muhammad Osama, Christopher Ré, Simran Arora
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
AMD GPUs offer state-of-the-art compute and memory bandwidth; however, peak performance AMD kernels are
written in raw assembly. To address the difficulty of mapping AI algorithms to hardware, recent work proposes
C++ embedded and PyTorch-inspired domain-specific languages like ThunderKittens (TK) to simplify high
performance AI kernel development on NVIDIA hardware. We explore the extent to which such primitives — for
explicit tile-based programming with optimized memory accesses and fine-grained asynchronous execution across
workers — are NVIDIA-specific or general. We provide the first detailed study of the programming primitives that
lead to performant AMD AI kernels, and we encapsulate these insights in the HipKittens (HK) programming
framework. We find that tile-based abstractions used in prior DSLs generalize to AMD GPUs, however we need to
rethink the algorithms that instantiate these abstractions for AMD. We validate the HK primitives across CDNA3
and CDNA4 AMD platforms. In evaluations, HK kernels compete with AMD’s hand-optimized assembly kernels
for GEMMs and attention, and consistently outperform compiler baselines. Moreover, assembly is difficult to
scale to the breadth of AI workloads; reflecting this, in some settings HK outperforms all available baselines by
$1.2 − 2.4\times$ ($d = 64$ attention, GQA non-causal backwards, memory-bound kernels). HK demonstrates a portable tile-based
programming model that abstracts over hardware-specific implementation details. These findings help pave the way
for a single, tile-based software layer for high-performance AI kernels across GPU vendors. HipKittens has been
productionalized in AITER and is released at: https://github.com/HazyResearch/HipKittens.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly