Learning from Less: Measuring the Effectiveness of RLVR in Low Data and Compute Regimes
Learning from Less: Measuring the Effectiveness of RLVR in Low Data and Compute Regimes
Justin Bauer, Thomas Walshe, Derek Pham, Harit Vishwakarma, Armin Parchami, Frederic Sala, Paroma Varma
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) typically relies on large quantities of high-quality annotated data, or questions with well-defined ground truth answers in the case of Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR). While previous work has explored the benefits to model reasoning capabilities by scaling both data and compute used for RLVR, these results lack applicability in many real-world settings where annotated data and accessible compute may be scarce. In this work, we present a comprehensive empirical study of open-source Small Language Model (SLM) performance after RLVR in low data regimes. Across three novel datasets covering number counting problems, graph reasoning, and spatial reasoning, we characterize how model performance scales with dataset size, diversity, and complexity. We demonstrate that (1) procedural datasets allow for fine-grained evaluation and training dataset development with controllable properties (size, diversity, and complexity), (2) under RLVR, models trained on lower complexity tasks can generalize to higher complexity tasks, and (3) training on mixed complexity datasets is associated with the greatest benefits in low data regimes, providing up to 5× sample efficiency versus training on easy tasks. These findings inspire future work on the development of data scaling laws for RLVR and the use of procedural data generators to further understand effective data development for efficient LLM fine-tuning.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly