Efficient, VRAM-Constrained xLM Inference on Clients
Efficient, VRAM-Constrained xLM Inference on Clients
Aditya Ukarande, Deep Shekhar, Marc Blackstein, Ram Rangan
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
To usher in the next round of client AI innovation, there is an urgent need to enable efficient, lossless inference of high-accuracy large language models (LLMs) and vision language models (VLMs), jointly referred to as xLMs, on client systems. This means efficient support for: a) interactive as well as batch modes, b) high-resolution VLM inference, c) dense and mixture-of-experts (MoE) LLMs, and d) adapting to system conditions (CPU thread count, CPU-GPU interconnect bandwidth, and video memory (VRAM) budget) and inference conditions (phase of execution and context size). While recent CPU-GPU hybrid scheduling techniques show promise, to the best of our knowledge, no single product handles all of the above.

In this paper, we address this problem with *pipelined sharding*, a novel, benchmark-profile-guided CPU-GPU hybrid scheduling technique to achieve efficient, VRAM-constrained inference for both dense and mixture-of-experts (MoE) LLMs. Using a combination of model sharding at the sub-layer level, CPU offloading, pipelined copy-compute, and prioritized tensor placement in VRAM, it optimizes both time-to-first-token (TTFT) and tokens per second (TPS) metrics, while flexibly adapting to system and inference conditions. For efficient, high-accuracy
VLM inference, we combine pipelined sharding with a llama.cpp implementation of three well-understood prior ideas (jointly called *VLMOpt*), namely, vision tensor CPU offloading, flash attention, and vision and language model VRAM overlap avoidance.

These enhancements are targeted at improving client xLM inference in future releases of two important NVIDIA products - the In-Game Inferencing software development kit (IGI SDK) and the Cosmos-Reason1 (CR1) physical AI reasoning VLM. Highlights from our rigorous evaluation spanning multiple models and client systems include: for interactive use, TTFT improves by up to 6.7$\times$ and TPS by up to 30$\times$ for LLMs, and CR1 inference’s VRAM demand is down by 10$\times$, while in batched mode, throughput improves by up to 8.2$\times$, all compared to their respective aggressive baselines.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly