Efficient Long-Context Language Model Training by Core Attention Disaggregation
Efficient Long-Context Language Model Training by Core Attention Disaggregation
Yonghao Zhuang, Junda Chen, Bo Pang, Yi Gu, Yibo Zhu, Yimin Jiang, Ion Stoica, Hao Zhang, Eric P. Xing
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
We present core attention disaggregation (CAD), a technique that improves long-context LLM training by disaggregating the core attention (CA) -- the parameter-free $\mathrm{softmax}(\mathbf{QK}^{\top})\mathbf{V}$ computation -- and schedules it on an independent pool of resources. Existing systems co-locate core attention with other components. At long context, the quadratic growth of CA computation and near-linear growth of the rest create load imbalance -- hence stragglers across data and pipeline groups.
CAD is enabled by two key observations: (i) \emph{statelessness}: CA has no trainable parameters and minimal transient state, so balancing reduces to scheduling compute-bound tasks; and (ii) \emph{composability}: modern attention kernels sustain high utilization on fused batches of arbitrary-length token-level shards. 
CAD dynamically partitions the core attention computation into token-level tasks (CA-tasks), and dispatches them to a pool of devices specialized for CA computation (attention servers). It then rebatches CA-tasks to equalize CA compute across attention servers without loss of kernel efficiency.
We have implemented CAD in a system called DistCA with a ping-pong scheme to completely overlap communication with compute, and in-place attention servers to improve memory utilization. 
Scaling to 512 H200 GPUs and 512K context length, DistCA eliminates DP/PP stragglers, achieves near-perfect compute and memory balance, and improves end-to-end training throughput by up to 1.9× over Megatron-LM and 1.35× over existing load-balancing methods
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly