ParallelKittens: Systematic and Practical Simplification of Multi-GPU AI Kernels
ParallelKittens: Systematic and Practical Simplification of Multi-GPU AI Kernels
Stuart H. Sul, Simran Arora, Benjamin F. Spector, Christopher Ré
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Inter-GPU communication has become a major bottleneck for modern AI workloads as models scale and improvements in hardware compute throughput outpace improvements in interconnect bandwidth. Existing systems mitigate this through compute-communication overlap but often fail to meet theoretical peak performance across heterogeneous workloads and new accelerators. Instead of operator-specific techniques, we ask whether a small set of simple, reusable principles can systematically guide the design of optimal multi-GPU kernels. We present ParallelKittens (PK), a minimal CUDA framework that drastically simplifies the development of overlapped multi-GPU kernels. PK extends the ThunderKittens framework and embodies the principles of multi-GPU kernel design through eight core primitives and a unified programming template, derived from a comprehensive analysis of the factors that govern multi-GPU performance—data-transfer mechanisms, resource scheduling, and design overheads. We validate PK on both Hopper and Blackwell architectures. With fewer than 50 lines of device code, PK achieves up to $2.33\times$ speedup for data- and tensor-parallel workloads, $4.08\times$ for sequence-parallel workloads, and $1.22\times$ for expert-parallel workloads.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly