Using Span Queries to Optimize Cache and Attention Locality
Using Span Queries to Optimize Cache and Attention Locality
Paul Castro, Nick Mitchell, Nathan Ordonez, Thomas Parnell, Mudhakar Srivatsa, Antoni Viros-i-Martin
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Clients are evolving beyond chat completion, and now include a variety of innovative inference-time scaling and deep reasoning techniques. At the same time, inference servers remain heavily optimized for chat completion and thus largely use linear KV cache strategies. Prior work has shown that large improvements to KV cache hit rate are possible if inference servers evolve towards these more non-linear use cases. However, they offer solutions that are also optimized for a single use case, RAG. In this paper, we demonstrate that chat, RAG,inference-time scaling, and agentic workloads can be expressed as special cases of a more general structure, the span query. The critical distinction that had been assumed by prior work lies in whether the order of the inputs matted. Do they commute? In chat, they do not. In RAG, they often do. A span query is an expression tree of inference calls, linked together with commutativity constraints. We describe span query syntax and semantics. We show how they can be automatically optimized to improve KV cache locality. We show how a small change to vLLM (affecting only 492 lines) can enable high-performance execution of span queries. Using this stack, we demonstrate that span queries can achieve 10-20x reductions in TTFT for two distinct non-chat use cases. Finally, we show that span queries can also be optimized to improve attention locality, so as to avoid the so-called lost-in-the-middle problem. We demonstrate that an attention-optimized span query on a 2b parameter model vastly outperforms the accuracy of a stock inference server using an 8b model.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly