SpecDiff-2: Scaling Diffusion Drafter Alignment For Faster Speculative Decoding
SpecDiff-2: Scaling Diffusion Drafter Alignment For Faster Speculative Decoding
Jameson Sandler, Jacob Christopher, Tom Hartvigsen, Ferdinando Fioretto
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Speculative decoding has become the standard approach for accelerating Large Language Model (LLM) inference. It exploits a lossless draft-then-verify procedure to circumvent the latency of autoregressive decoding, achieving impressive speed-ups.
    Yet, current speculative decoding approaches remain limited by two fundamental bottlenecks: \textbf{(1)} the autoregressive dependency during drafting which limits parallelism, and \textbf{(2)} frequent rejections of draft tokens caused by misalignment between the draft and verify models. 
    This paper proposes \emph{SpecDiff-2}, a novel framework to jointly address these two bottlenecks. It leverages discrete diffusion as a non-autoregressive drafter to address bottleneck (1) and develops novel techniques to calibrate discrete diffusion drafters with autoregressive verifiers, addressing bottleneck (2). Experimental results across a comprehensive benchmark suite show that \emph{SpecDiff-2} achieves a new state-of-the-art across reasoning, coding, and mathematical benchmarks, improving tokens-per-second by up to an average of $+55\%$ over previous baselines and obtaining up to $5.5\times$ average speed-up over standard decoding, without any loss of accuracy.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly