OPKV: A High-Throughput Plugin-Driven Framework for Recallable Sparsity in Paged KV Cache Systems
OPKV: A High-Throughput Plugin-Driven Framework for Recallable Sparsity in Paged KV Cache Systems
Huazheng Lao, Xiaofeng Li, Rui Xu, Long Chen, Xia Zhu, Jinquan Zhang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Long-context large language model (LLM) inference faces severe KV cache inflation, making GPU memory a key bottleneck. Existing recallable sparsity methods mitigate memory pressure by offloading non-critical key–value (KV) pairs to CPU memory and recalling them on demand, they are intrusive to KV cache management in the existing inference frameworks and fail to cope with the linearly increasing recall overhead under high batches. To address these limitations, we propose OPKV, a high-throughput plugin-driven framework that seamlessly integrates recallable sparsity into paged KV cache systems and performs unified recall optimization.  OPKV introduces a plugin interface that decouples sparsity logic from model and cache management, and applies object reaggregation and hot page hit algorithms to reduce the recall overhead based on the observation of spatial discreteness and temporal locality in critical KV selection. In addition, a local intra-iteration metadata manager is implemented to perform millisecond-level page retrieval and cache eviction. The experimental results show that OPKV helps the SoTA methods attain 1.3 - 1.8x higher decoding throughput under different batches.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly