FarSkip-Collective: Unhobbling Blocking Communication in Mixture of Experts Models
FarSkip-Collective: Unhobbling Blocking Communication in Mixture of Experts Models
Yonatan Dukler, Guihong Li, Deval Shah, Jiang Liu, Vikram Appia, Emad Barsoum
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Blocking communication presents a major hurdle in running MoEs efficiently in distributed settings. To address this, we present FarSkip-Collective which modifies the architecture of modern models to enable overlapping of their computation with communication. Our approach modifies the architecture to skip connections in the model and it is unclear a priori whether the modified model architecture can remain as capable, especially for large state-of-the-art models and while modifying all of the model layers. 
We answer this question in the affirmative and fully convert a series of state-of-the-art models varying from 16B to 109B parameters to enable overlapping of their communication while achieving accuracy that is comparable with their original open-source releases. For example, we convert Llama 4 Scout (109B) via self-distillation and achieve average accuracy within 1% of its instruction tuned release averaged over a wide range of downstream evaluations. 
In addition to demonstrating retained accuracy of the large modified models, we realize the benefits of FarSkip-Collective through optimized implementations that explicitly overlap communication with computation, accelerating both training and inference in existing frameworks.
For inference, we demonstrate 32.6% speedup in Time To First Token when serving a converted DeepSeek-V3 architecture with expert parallelism in SGLang and achieve 97.3% communication-computation overlap during the prefill stage. 
During training, our approach enables 88.9% communication overlap of the all-to-all communication collectives when pre-training DeepSeek-V3 MoE layers with expert parallelism.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly