ExecuTorch - A Unified PyTorch Solution to Run ML Models On-Device
ExecuTorch - A Unified PyTorch Solution to Run ML Models On-Device
Mergen Nachin, Digant Desai, Stephen Jia, Chen Lai, Mengwei Liu, Jacob Szwejbka, Raziel Alvarez, RJ Ascani, Dave Bort, Manuel Candales, Andrew Caples, Yanan Cao, Zhengxu Chen, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Comer, Tanvir Islam, Songhao Jia, Tarun Karuturi, Jack Khuu, Abhinay Kukkadapu, Tugsbayasgalan Manlaibaatar, Andrew Or, Kimish Patel, Siddartha Pothapragada, Lucy Qiu, Supriya Rao, Orion Reblitz-Richardson, Max Ren, Scott Roy, Anthony Shoumikhin, Scott Wolchok, Guang Yang, Angela Yi, Martin Yuan, Hansong Zhang, Jack Zhang, Jerry Zhang, Shunting Zhang, Cagatay Bilgin
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Local execution of AI on edge devices is critical for privacy, low latency, and offline operation. However, deploying models on diverse hardware remains fragmented, often requiring model conversion or complete implementation outside the PyTorch ecosystem where the model was originally authored. We introduce ExecuTorch, a unified PyTorch-native deployment framework for edge AI. ExecuTorch enables seamless deployment of machine learning models across heterogeneous compute environments. It scales from completely embedded microcontrollers to complex system-on-chips (SoCs) with dedicated accelerators, powering devices ranging from wearables and smartphones to large compute clusters. ExecuTorch preserves PyTorch semantics while allowing customization, support for optimizations like quantization, and pluggable execution ''backends''. These features together enable fast experimentation, allowing researchers to validate deployment behavior entirely within PyTorch, bridging the gap between research and production.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly