PROMPTS: PeRformance Optimization via Multi-Agent Planning for LLM Training and Serving
PROMPTS: PeRformance Optimization via Multi-Agent Planning for LLM Training and Serving
Yuran Ding, Ruobing Han, Xiaofan Zhang, Xinwei Chen
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Optimizing large-language model (LLM) training and serving on large-scale distributed systems is a significant challenge. This difficulty stems from the rapidly evolving LLM landscape, the requirement for deep domain expertise, and the need for workload-specific optimization strategies. Existing methods rely on either handcrafted optimization performed by human experts, which is tedious and time-consuming, or resource-intensive black-box searches, which lack the extensibility to keep pace with evolving models and hardware. To address this, we introduce
PROMPTS
, a novel multi-agent framework that complements traditional search methods with expert-informed reasoning to deliver system-level optimization with much fewer shots. Key components of the proposed framework include an
Analyzer Agent
that diagnoses performance bottlenecks by synthesizing profiler data and a
Proposal Agent
that leverages a knowledge base to generate optimized sharding configurations with detailed justifications through retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
Experimental results across eight real-world LLM workloads have demonstrated that PROMPTS can provide valid reasoning and accurate recommendations by considering LLM workload characteristics and backend hardware features, delivering performance improvements of up to
434%
. These workloads spanned LLMs with Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) and dense models, system configurations from 2-TPU chips to 512-chip systems with 2D/3D Torus interconnects, and the full LLM lifecycle including pre-training, post-training, and serving.
To validate our agent's system optimization proposals, we benchmarked them against production configurations that were previously optimized by experts, either through extensive manual analysis or automated black-box searches. In every case, our agent independently identified this expert-validated solution within its top three recommendations from a
single invocation
. Furthermore, the agent's top-ranked recommendation matched the production solution in
87.5%
of cases, demonstrating its ability to not only find optimized configurations but also to correctly prioritize the optimization candidates.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly