AIRS: Scaling Live Inference in Resource Constrained Environments
AIRS: Scaling Live Inference in Resource Constrained Environments
Nilesh Jagnik, Xiaohao Yang, Tuan Do, Chelsea Chen, Harshvardhan GM
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Advancements in large language models (LLMs) have made them increasingly useful for complex reasoning tasks which previously required domain experts. One such task is quality evaluation of query responses produced by a search engine. Evaluation generates metrics necessary to study the quality, impact, and usefulness of product changes and features. Typically, to compute evaluation metrics, human experts are asked to rate various attributes of search responses. This process is generally quite expensive and requires several days to complete. As an alternative, LLMs are now being used to perform rating tasks with lower costs and latency. In addition, many new metrics are being developed to evaluate Google's new AI-based offerings, which require ratings too. As a result, there is much higher demand for LLM rating prediction tasks in comparison with the allocated TPU (Tensor Processing Unit) budget. A larger portion of the company's TPU resources are reserved for serving live user traffic. In this paper, we present the AI Rater Service (AIRS), an inference pipeline that employs several software engineering techniques to generate AI ratings with high reliability and low latency. AIRS maximizes LLM inference throughput by optimizing TPU resource utilization across various evaluation workflows, while minimizing latency for higher priority tasks.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly