CATWILD: Compiler Autotuning for TPU workloads in the Wild
CATWILD: Compiler Autotuning for TPU workloads in the Wild
Ignacio Cano, Yu Wang, Mike Burrows, Ziqiang Feng, Matheus Camargo, Chao Wang, David Liu, Tengyu Sun, Alexander Wertheim, Arissa Wongpanich, Christof Angermueller, Hyojun Kim, Wenqi Cao, Aleksey Orekhov, Amit Sabne, Emma Sevastian, Mehrdad Khani, Karthik Srinivasa Murthy, Berkin Ilbeyi, Subhankar Shah, Ryan Lefever, Arjun Khare, Ankit Sinha, Peter Ma, Matt Bierbaum, Jeremiah Wilke, Emily Donahue, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Nikhil Sarda, Vineetha Govindaraj, Shobha Vasudevan, Kirill Gugaev, Idan Nachman, Jie Sun, Jose Baiocchi Paredes, Samrat Ghosh, Domagoj Babic, Zongwei Zhou, Naveen Kumar, Phitchaya Phothilimthana
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Compilers play a fundamental role at achieving peak performance for machine learning (ML) workloads. However, given the diverse nature of workloads and accelerators, compilers’ heuristics and analytical cost models can result in sub-optimal performance, and thus waste precious datacenter resources. Furthermore, the multitude of tunable parameters and their complex interplay often make it impossible for human experts to manually find optimal configurations. In this paper, we present CATWILD, a system that automatically optimizes ML jobs in Google’s TPU fleet using compiler autotuning techniques. We describe CATWILD’s design and implementation, and evaluate its performance using a handful of representative metrics. We further report experiences and lessons learned from its five-year development and operation. To the best of our knowledge, CATWILD represents the first ML compiler autotuning solution deployed in datacenters at scale. Its successful rollout yielded substantial benefits, generating tuned configurations for a large portion of Google’s TPU training workloads and achieving significant chip savings.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly