SwiftGS: Algorithm and System Co-Optimization for Fast 3D Gaussian Splatting on GPUs
SwiftGS: Algorithm and System Co-Optimization for Fast 3D Gaussian Splatting on GPUs
Lingjun Gao, Zhican Wang, Zhiwen Mo, Hongxiang Fan
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) have enabled high-quality and efficient novel view synthesis, demonstrating great potential in real-world applications such as robotic perception and digital-twin construction. 
However, 3DGS requires processing up to millions of Gaussians in parallel, imposing significant computational and memory demands that limit its deployment on resource-constrained platforms.
Through systematic profiling and analysis, this paper identifies several redundancy at both the algorithmic and system implementation levels.
These insights motivate us to explore several novel optimizations, including adaptive early sorting, GPU-efficient axis-shared rasterization, and dynamic thresholding.
Unlike prior work that focuses only on either algorithmic improvements or systems optimization, our approach explores a joint algorithm and system co-optimization to push the performance limits of 3DGS on GPUs.
Comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that our co-optimization approach, named \textit{Flash3DGS} achieves a speed-up of up to $1.41 \times$ with negligible algorithmic performance drop in rendering image quality compared with the \textit{gsplat} baseline.
Importantly, our co-optimization is orthogonal to most existing 3DGS acceleration methods, allowing for synergistic performance gains when used in combination.
We plan to release our code publicly upon paper acceptance to support reproducibility and future research.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly