Accelerating Large-Scale Reasoning Model Inference with Sparse Self-Speculative Decoding
Accelerating Large-Scale Reasoning Model Inference with Sparse Self-Speculative Decoding
Yilong Zhao, Jiaming Tang, Kan Zhu, Zihao Ye, Chi-Chih Chang, Chaofan Lin, Jongseok Park, Guangxuan Xiao, Mohamed S. Abdelfattah, Mingyu Gao, Baris Kasikci, Song Han, Ion Stoica
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Reasoning language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities on challenging tasks by generating elaborate chain-of-thought (CoT) solutions. However, such lengthy generation shifts the inference bottleneck from compute-bound to memory-bound. To generate each token, the model applies full attention to all previously generated tokens, requiring memory access to an increasingly large KV-Cache. Consequently, longer generations demand more memory access for every step, leading to substantial pressure on memory bandwidth. 

To address this, we introduce SpecGen, a speculative decoding framework that reuses the same model as the draft and target models (i.e., self-speculation). SpecGen features a novel sparse attention mechanism \textit{PillarAttn} as the draft model, which accurately selects critical tokens via elegantly reusing information from the verification stage. Furthermore, SpecGen co-designs self-speculation with three system innovations: (1) a unified scheduler to batch token drafting and verification, (2) delayed verification for CPU/GPU overlap, and (3) dynamic KV-Cache management to maximize memory utilization. Across various models and datasets, SpecGen outperforms state-of-the-art solutions, with an up to $2.13\times$ throughput speedup.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly