ProTrain: Efficient LLM Training via Automatic Memory Management
ProTrain: Efficient LLM Training via Automatic Memory Management
Hanmei Yang, Jin Zhou, Yao Fu, Xiaoqun Wang, Ramine Roane, Hui Guan, Tongping Liu
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Memory pressure has emerged as a dominant constraint in scaling the training of large language models (LLMs), particularly in resource-constrained environments. While modern frameworks incorporate various memory-saving techniques, they often expose low-level configuration knobs that require manual tuning and specialized system expertise. This not only adds engineering overhead but also risks suboptimal hardware utilization when misconfigured.
This paper introduces ProTrain, a novel training system that automatically tailors memory management policies to the model architecture and underlying hardware resources, eliminating the need for manual intervention. The core of ProTrain is its automated memory management that abstracts complex memory management strategies into a few tunable configuration parameters, allowing searches for optimal parameter settings using cost models. ProTrain is equipped with a runtime profiler that provides precise estimates of latency, memory usage, and I/O bandwidth to build high-fidelity cost models. 
ProTrain does not change the training algorithm and thus does not compromise accuracy. Experiments show that ProTrain improves training throughput by 1.43$\times$ to 2.71$\times$ compared to the state-of-the-art training systems.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly