CRAFT: Fine-Grained Cost-Aware Expert Replication For Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Serving
CRAFT: Fine-Grained Cost-Aware Expert Replication For Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Serving
Adrian Zhao, Zhenkun Cai, Zhenyu Song, Lingfan Yu, Haozheng Fan, Jun Wu, Yida Wang, Nandita Vijaykumar
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) has recently emerged as the mainstream architecture for efficiently scaling large language models while maintaining near-constant computational cost. Expert parallelism distributes parameters by partitioning experts across devices, but this introduces token-level load imbalance during inference. Expert replication is a widely adopted load-balancing technique in serving frameworks that alleviates load imbalance in large-scale deployments by replicating experts with high loads. In this work, we demonstrate that existing replication schemes often _over-replicate_, with many replicas providing marginal improvement. Replicas consume substantial GPU memory, which may lead to resource contention and throughput degradation. We present CRAFT, an efficient expert replication framework that maximizes load balance under a given memory budget by performing fine-grained, per-layer replication based on the estimated replication benefit. CRAFT can be seamlessly integrated into existing serving frameworks without any additional training or model changes. Our evaluation shows that CRAFT increases end-to-end serving throughput by $1.14\times$ on average (up to $1.2\times$) over existing replication techniques in large-scale deployments with models ranging from hundreds of billions to a trillion parameters.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly