TokenWeave: Efficient Compute-Communication Overlap for Distributed LLM Inference
TokenWeave: Efficient Compute-Communication Overlap for Distributed LLM Inference
Raja Gond, Nipun Kwatra, Ramachandran Ramjee
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Distributed inference of large language models (LLMs) using tensor parallelism can introduce communication overheads of 20% even over GPUs connected via NVLink, a high-speed GPU interconnect. Several techniques have been proposed to mitigate these overheads by decomposing computations into smaller tasks and overlapping communication with these subtasks. However, none of these techniques are turned on by default during tensor-parallel serving in systems like vLLM, SGLang and TensorRT-LLM. This is because the number of tokens processed per iteration is typically kept small to support low-latency serving, and decomposing such smaller workloads to enable communication overlap results in worse performance. Further, the communication itself uses many streaming multiprocessors (SMs) that would otherwise be available for computation, increasing overhead.
We present TokenWeave, the first system to enable efficient compute-communication overlap for tensor-parallel model inference for token lengths as small as 1024. TokenWeave identifies RMSNorm, a previously overlooked operation, as crucial and optimizes it along with communication by implementing a novel fused
AllReduce–RMSNorm
kernel. Further, this kernel leverages the NVSHARP/Multimem feature available on modern GPUs (e.g., Hopper, Blackwell) to jointly perform communication and RMSNorm efficiently using only 2–8 streaming multiprocessors (SMs) on an 8xH100 NVIDIA DGX system. Our evaluations demonstrate up to
1.28x
speedup in latency (baseline÷ours) and up to
1.19x
higher throughput (ours÷baseline) across multiple models and workloads. In several settings, TokenWeave delivers better performance than an equivalent model with all communication removed. The source code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/tokenweave.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly