BLASST: Dynamic BLocked Attention Sparsity via Softmax Thresholding
BLASST: Dynamic BLocked Attention Sparsity via Softmax Thresholding
Jiayi Yuan, Cameron Shinn, Kai Xu, Jingze Cui, George Klimiashvili, Guangxuan Xiao, Perkz Zheng, Bo Li, Yuxin Zhou, Zhouhai Ye, Weijie You, Tian Zheng, Dominic Brown, Pengbo Wang, Markus Hoehnerbach, Richard Cai, Julien Demouth, John D. Owens, Xia Hu, Song Han, Timmy Liu, Huizi Mao
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The growing demand for long-context inference capabilities in Large Language Models (LLMs) has intensified the computational and memory bottlenecks inherent to the self-attention mechanism. To address this challenge, we introduce BLASST, a drop-in, dynamic sparse attention mechanism that accelerates inference by using only a fixed scalar threshold to skip attention blocks. Our method targets practical inference deployment by removing the barriers to adoption present in existing works. As such, BLASST eliminates training requirements, avoids expensive pre-computation passes, accelerates both prefill and decode across all major attention variants (MHA, GQA, MQA, and MLA), provides optimized support for modern hardware, and easily integrates into existing frameworks. This is achieved by reusing online softmax statistics to identify negligible attention scores, skipping softmax, value block loads, and the subsequent matrix multiplication. We demonstrate the BLASST algorithm by delivering optimized kernels with negligible latency overhead. Our automated threshold calibration procedure reveals a simple inverse relationship between optimal threshold and context length, meaning we require only a single threshold each for prefill and decode per model. Preserving benchmark accuracy, we demonstrate a 1.52x speedup for prefill at 71.9% sparsity and a 1.48x speedup for decode at 73.2% sparsity on modern GPUs.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly