GhostServe: A Lightweight Checkpointing System in the Shadow for Fault-Tolerant LLM Serving
GhostServe: A Lightweight Checkpointing System in the Shadow for Fault-Tolerant LLM Serving
Shakya Jayakody, Youpeng Zhao, Chinmay Dhanraj Nehate, Jun Wang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The rise of million-token, agent-based applications has placed unprecedented demands on large language model (LLM) inference services. 
The long-running nature of these tasks increases their susceptibility to hardware and software faults, leading to costly job failures, wasted resources, and degraded user experience.
The stateful key-value (KV) cache, which grows with the sequence length, presents a central challenge as it is a critical and vulnerable component in distributed serving systems.
In this work, we propose
GhostServe
, a novel checkpointing solution to facilitate fault-tolerant LLM serving.
Specifically, GhostServe protects the streaming KV cache
in the shadow
by applying erasure coding to generate and store the parity shards in host memory.
In the event of device failures, GhostServe enables fast reconstruction of the lost KV cache, allowing the inference process to resume seamlessly without costly full recomputation or state replication.
Evaluations demonstrate that GhostServe reduces checkpointing latency by up to 2.7x and recovery latency by 2.1x for a single batch, and 1.2x median response latency compared to existing methods, in the presence of system failures, paving the way for high-availability and cost-effective LLM serving at scale.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly