db-SP: Accelerating Sparse Attention for Visual Generative Models with Dual-Balanced Sequence Parallelism
db-SP: Accelerating Sparse Attention for Visual Generative Models with Dual-Balanced Sequence Parallelism
Siqi Chen, Ke Hong, Tianchen Zhao, Ruiqi Xie, Zhenhua Zhu, Xudong Zhang, Yu Wang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Scaling Diffusion Transformer (DiT) inference via sequence parallelism is critical for reducing latency in visual generation, but is severely hampered by workload imbalance when applied to models employing block-wise sparse attention. The imbalance stems from the inherent variation in sparsity across attention heads and the irregular distribution of dense blocks within the sparse mask, when sequence parallelism is applied along the head dimension (as in Ulysses) or the block dimension (as in Ring Attention). In this paper, we formalize a \textit{sparse imbalance ratio} to quantify the imbalance, and propose \textit{db}-SP, a sparsity-aware sequence parallelism technique that tackles the challenge. \textit{db}-SP contains a dual-level partitioning approach that achieves near-perfect workload balance at both the head and block levels with negligible overhead. Furthermore, to handle the evolving sparsity patterns across denoising steps and layers, \textit{db}-SP dynamically determines the parallel degrees for the head and block dimensions at runtime. Experimental results demonstrate that \nickname delivers an end-to-end speedup of 1.25× and an attention-specific speedup of 1.40× over state-of-the-art sequence parallel methods on average.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly