Privatar: Scalable Privacy-preserving Multi-user VR via Secure Offloading
Privatar: Scalable Privacy-preserving Multi-user VR via Secure Offloading
Jianming Tong, Hanshen Xiao, Krishna Kumar Nair, Hao Kang, Ashish Sirasao, Ziqi Zhang, G. Edward Suh, Tushar Krishna
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Multi-user virtual reality (VR) applications such as football and concert experiences rely on real-time avatar reconstruction to enable immersive interaction. However, rendering avatars for numerous participants on each headset incurs prohibitive computational overhead, fundamentally limiting scalability. This work introduces a framework, Privatar, to offload avatar reconstruction from headset to untrusted devices within the same local network while safeguarding sensitive facial features against adversaries capable of intercepting offloaded data.

Privatar builds on the insight that "domain-specific knowledge of avatar reconstruction enables provably private offloading at minimal cost". (1) _System level_. We observe avatar reconstruction is frequency-domain decomposable via block-wise DCT with negligible quality drop, and propose Horizontal Partitioning (HP) to keep the most energy frequency components on-device and offloads only low-energy components. HP offloads local computation while reducing information leakage to low-energy subsets only. (2) _Privacy level_. For _individually_ offloaded, _multi-dimensional_ signals without aggregation, worst-case local Differential Privacy requires prohibitive noise, ruining utility. We observe users’ expression statistical distribution are _slowly changing over time and trackable online_, and hence propose Distribution-Aware Minimal Perturbation (DAMP). DAMP minimizes noise based on each user’s expression distribution to significantly reduce its effects on utility and accuracy, retaining formal privacy guarantee. Combined, HP provides empirical privacy protection against expression identification attack. And DAMP further augments it to offer a formal guarantee against arbitrary adversaries.

On a Meta Quest Pro, Privatar supports up to 2.37$\times$ more concurrent users at 5.7$\sim$6.5% higher reconstruction loss and $\sim$9% energy overhead, providing a better throughout-loss Pareto frontier over SotA quantization, sparsity, and local reconstruction baseline. Privatar further provides both provable privacy guarantee and stays robust against both empirical attack and NN-based Expression Identification Attack, proving its resilience in practice. Our code is open-sourced at https://github.com/georgia-tech-synergy-lab/Privatar.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly