MLCommons Chakra: Advancing Performance Benchmarking and Co-design using Standardized Execution Traces
MLCommons Chakra: Advancing Performance Benchmarking and Co-design using Standardized Execution Traces
Srinivas Sridharan, Andy Balogh, Bradford M. Beckmann, Brian Coutinho, Louis Feng, Sheng Fu, Sanshan Gao, Mehryar Garakani, Taekyung Heo, David Kanter, Josh Ladd, Ziwei Li, Winston Liu, Changhai Man, Dan Mihailescu, Spandan More, Joongun Park, Ashwin Ramachandran, Vinay Ramakrishnaiah, Saeed Rashidi, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Puneet Sharma, Phio Tian, William Won, Hanjiang Wu, Huan Xu, Jinsun Yoo, Tushar Krishna
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The fast pace of artificial intelligence (AI) innovation demands an agile methodology for observation, reproduction and optimization of distributed machine learning (ML) workload behavior in production AI systems and enables efficient software-hardware (SW-HW) co-design for future systems. We present Chakra, an open and portable ecosystem for performance benchmarking and co-design. The core component of Chakra is an open and interoperable graph-based representation of distributed AI/ML workloads, called Chakra Execution Traces (ET). These ETs represent key operations, such as compute, memory, and communication, data and control dependencies, timing, and resource constraints. Additionally, Chakra includes a complementary set of tools and capabilities to enable the collection, analysis, generation, and adoption of Chakra ETs by a broad range of simulators, emulators, and replay tools. We present analysis of Chakra traces collected on production AI clusters and demonstrate value via real-world case studies. Chakra has been adopted by MLCommons and has active contributions and engagement across the industry, including but not limited to, NVIDIA, AMD, Meta, Keysight, HPE, and Scala, to name a few.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly