TeleRAG: Efficient Retrieval-Augmented Generation Inference with Lookahead Retrieval
TeleRAG: Efficient Retrieval-Augmented Generation Inference with Lookahead Retrieval
Chien-Yu Lin, Keisuke Kamahori, Yiyu Liu, Xiaoxiang Shi, Madhav Kashyap, Yile Gu, Rulin Shao, Zihao Ye, Kan Zhu, Rohan Kadekodi, Stephanie Wang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Luis Ceze, Baris Kasikci
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) extends large language models (LLMs) with external data sources to enhance factual correctness and domain coverage.
Modern RAG pipelines rely on large datastores, creating a significant system challenge: achieving high throughput and low latency is difficult, especially when GPU memory is limited.
To address these challenges, we propose TeleRAG, an efficient inference system that reduces latency and improves throughput with minimal GPU memory requirements.
The core innovation of TeleRAG is *lookahead retrieval*, a prefetching mechanism that predicts required data and transfers them from CPU to GPU in parallel with LLM generation.
In addition, TeleRAG adopts a prefetching scheduler and a cache-aware scheduler to support efficient multi-GPU inference with minimal overhead.
Evaluations show TeleRAG achieves up to a 1.98$\times$ average end-to-end latency reduction (single-query) and 1.83$\times$ higher average throughput (batched), as well as good scalability in throughput. This confirms the practical utility of TeleRAG for faster and more memory-efficient deployments of RAG applications.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly