PRISM: Parametrically Refactor Inference for Speculative Decoding Draft Models
PRISM: Parametrically Refactor Inference for Speculative Decoding Draft Models
Xuliang Wang, Yuetao Chen, Maochan Zhen, Fang Liu, Xinzhou Zheng, Xingwu Liu, Hong Xu, Ming Li
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs), constrained by their auto-regressive nature, suffer from slow decoding. Speculative decoding methods have emerged as a promising solution to accelerate LLM decoding, attracting attention from both systems and AI research communities. Recently, the pursuit of better draft quality has driven a trend toward parametrically larger draft models, which inevitably introduces substantial computational overhead. While existing work attempts to balance the trade-off between prediction accuracy and compute latency, we address this fundamental dilemma through architectural innovation.
We propose PRISM, which disaggregates the computation of each predictive step across different parameter sets, refactoring the computational pathways of draft models to successfully decouple model capacity from inference cost. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that PRISM outperforms all existing draft architectures, achieving exceptional acceptance lengths while maintaining minimal draft latency for superior end-to-end speedup. We also re-examine scaling laws with PRISM, revealing that PRISM scales more effectively with expanding data volumes than other draft architectures. Through rigorous and fair comparison, we show that PRISM boosts the decoding throughput of an already highly optimized inference engine by more than 2.6×.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly