FlexTrain: Scalable Hybrid-Parallel Training with Elastic Resource Utilization and Consistent Accuracy
FlexTrain: Scalable Hybrid-Parallel Training with Elastic Resource Utilization and Consistent Accuracy
Weilin Cai, Diandian Gu, Baoquan Zhong, Jun Wang, Zhuolin Zheng, Gaohong Liu, Jiang Kaihua, Shuguang Wang, Wencong Xiao, Jiayi Huang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Large language model (LLM) training has become a critical workload in shared GPU clusters. However, our observations reveal that these clusters suffer from significant underutilization. To address this inefficiency, various elastic training techniques have been developed to dynamically adjust GPU allocations to harness idle resources. Despite their potential, these methods have seen limited deployment in production environments due to three major challenges: accuracy inconsistency, excessive profiling overhead, and limited flexibility.
In this paper, we propose FlexTrain, an elastic training system that achieves consistent model accuracy, high training efficiency, and effective resource utilization.
FlexTrain prioritizes adjustments to the pipeline parallelism (PP) degree to preserve deterministic computation and maintain accuracy consistency, while also supporting data parallelism (DP) scaling to further enhance throughput under relaxed consistency requirements.
It generates optimal PP schedules, predicts training performance under different configurations, and makes scaling decisions based on job submission intervals, scaling overhead, and expected throughput gains.
Evaluation results show that FlexTrain can achieve up to 1.73$\times$ speedup for elastic jobs while preserving consistent accuracy, and up to 2.27$\times$ when accuracy consistency is relaxed, compared to conventional non-elastic scheduling strategy.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly