TriInfer: Hybrid EPD Disaggregation for Efficient Multimodal Large Language Model Inference
TriInfer: Hybrid EPD Disaggregation for Efficient Multimodal Large Language Model Inference
Xianzhe Dong, Tongxuan Liu, Yuting Zeng, Weizhe Huang, Xiaoyang Zhao, Siyu Wu, Liangyu Liu, Yang Liu, Yu Wu, Hailong Yang, Ke Zhang, Jing Li
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Existing MLLM inference systems are typically designed based on the architecture of language models, coupling image processing and language processing. This design struggles to accommodate the heterogeneous demands of different stages in terms of computational resources, memory access patterns, and service-level objectives (SLOs), leading to low resource utilization and high request latency, ultimately failing to meet the service requirements of diverse inference scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose TriInfer, an efficient MLLM inference system that adopts a Hybrid Encode-Prefill-Decode (EPD) Disaggregation architecture. By scheduling the three stages — encode, prefill, and decode — onto separate heterogeneous inference instances, the system flexibly reallocates resources across stages, significantly reducing idle computation, alleviating resource bottlenecks, and improving overall system throughput and scalability. In addition, TriInfer supports a stage-level batching strategy that enhances load balancing, enables parallel execution of visual and language models, and further
optimizes inference performance. Experiments under real multimodal inference workloads demonstrate that TriInfer can achieve up to 3.7× higher inference throughput compared to state-of-the-art systems (e.g., vLLM, SGLang) while meeting the 90th percentile request SLO.The source code of TriInfer will be released at https://github.com/dongxianzhe/triinfer.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly