Beyond the Buzz: A Pragmatic Take on Inference Disaggregation
Beyond the Buzz: A Pragmatic Take on Inference Disaggregation
Tiyasa Mitra, Ritika Borkar, Nidhi Bhatia, Shivam Raj, Hongkuan Zhou, Yan Ru Pei, Vishwanath Venkatesan, Kyle Kranen, Ramon Matas, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Ritchie Zhao, Maximilian Golub, Arpan Dutta, Suresh Nambi, Sailaja Madduri, Dharmesh Jani, Brian Pharris, Itay Neeman, Bita Darvish Rouhani
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
As inference scales to multi-node deployments, prefill-decode disaggregation — splitting inference into distinct
phases — offers a promising path to improving the throughput-interactivity Pareto frontier. Despite growing
enthusiasm and a surge of open-source efforts, large-scale deployment of disaggregated serving remains limited
due to the complexity of the optimization search space and system-level coordination. In this paper, we present the
first systematic study of disaggregated inference at scale, evaluating hundreds of thousands of design points across
diverse workloads and hardware configurations. We find that disaggregation is most effective for prefill-heavy
traffic patterns and larger models. Our results highlight the critical role of dynamic rate matching and elastic
scaling in achieving Pareto-optimal performance. These insights, in conjunction with the deployment flexibility
offered by NVIDIA Dynamo, provide a foundation to navigate the trade-off between system throughput and
interactivity in efficient disaggregated deployments.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly