Virtual Machine NUMA Placement at Scale: Learning the Norm, Shielding the Tail
Virtual Machine NUMA Placement at Scale: Learning the Norm, Shielding the Tail
Yibo Zhao, Tianyuan Wu, Hui Xue, Qi Chen, Zhenhua Han, Zikai Xu, Yuntai Chang, Rui Gao, Steve Deng, Ray Jui-Hao Chiang, Mingxia Li, Yuqing Yang, Cheng Tan, Fan Yang, Peng Cheng, Yongqiang Xiong, Lili Qiu, Lidong Zhou
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
In modern data centers, servers organize memory and CPUs into Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) nodes,
where unequal memory-to-CPU proximity leads to varying memory latency. Hypervisors must carefully place
Virtual Machines (VMs) to reduce remote memory access. Poor placements can lead to significant performance
degradation—sometimes up to 30%. However, achieving optimal placement at scale is challenging due to the
large number of VM configurations, diverse NUMA structures, and evolving workload patterns. We present
Catur, a NUMA placement system designed for large-scale cloud environments. Catur leverages reinforcement
learning to learn from production data. Moreover, to address real-world challenges, Catur integrates several techniques: robust action space design to prevent model collapse, reward shaping to address learning inefficiency,
drift-aware continuous training for evolving workload patterns, and speculative shielding to mitigate VM performance anomalies. Evaluations on production traces with 100 million VMs demonstrate that Catur reduces
average resource defect by 34.2%–50.0% compared to state-of-the-art hypervisor policies.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly