BatchLLM: Optimizing Large Batched LLM Inference with Global Prefix Sharing and Throughput-oriented Token Batching
BatchLLM: Optimizing Large Batched LLM Inference with Global Prefix Sharing and Throughput-oriented Token Batching
Zhen Zheng, Xin Ji, Taosong Fang, Fanghao Zhou, Chuanjie Liu, Gang Peng
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) increasingly play an important role in a wide range of information processing and management tasks in industry.
Many of these tasks are performed in large batches or even offline, and the performance indicator for which is throughput.
These tasks usually show the characteristic of prefix sharing, where different prompt input can partially show the common prefix.
However, the existing LLM inference engines tend to optimize the streaming requests and show limitations of supporting the large batched tasks with the prefix sharing characteristic.
The existing solutions use the LRU-based cache to reuse the KV context of common prefix between requests.
The KV context that are about to be reused may be prematurely evicted with the implicit cache management.
Besides, the streaming oriented systems do not leverage the request-batch information and can not mix the decoding tokens with the prefill chunks to the best for the batched scenarios, and thus fails to saturate the GPU.
We propose BatchLLM to address the above problems.
BatchLLM explicitly identifies the common prefixes globally.
The requests sharing the same prefix will be scheduled together to reuse the KV context the best.
BatchLLM reorders the requests and schedules the requests with larger ratio of decoding first to better mix the decoding tokens with the latter prefill chunks, and applies memory-centric token batching to enlarge the token-batch sizes,
which helps to increase the GPU utilization.
Extensive evaluation shows that BatchLLM outperforms vLLM and SGLang by $1.3\times$ to $10.8\times$ on a set of microbenchmarks and a typical industry workload under different hardware environments.
Code is available at [https://github.com/microsoft/MixLLM/tree/batchllm_vllm_064](https://github.com/microsoft/MixLLM/tree/batchllm_vllm_064).
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly