Search Your Block Floating Point Scales!
Search Your Block Floating Point Scales!
Tanmaey Gupta, Hayden Prairie, Xiaoxia wu, Reyna Abhyankar, Qingyang Wu, Austin Silveria, Pragaash Ponnusamy, Jue Wang, Ben Athiwaratkun, Leon Song, Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Chris De Sa
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Quantization has emerged as a standard technique for accelerating inference for generative models by enabling faster low-precision computations and reduced memory transfers. Recently, GPU accelerators have added first-class support for microscaling Block Floating Point (BFP) formats. Standard BFP algorithms use a fixed scale based on the maximum magnitude of the block. We observe that this scale choice can be suboptimal with respect to quantization errors. In this work, we propose ScaleSearch, an alternative strategy for selecting these scale factors: using a fine-grained search leveraging the mantissa bits in microscaling formats to minimize the quantization error for the given distribution. ScaleSearch can be integrated with existing quantization methods such as Post Training Quantization and low precision attention, and is shown to improve their performance. Additionally, we introduce ScaleSearchAttention, an accelerated NVFP4-based attention algorithm, which uses ScaleSearch and adapted prior techniques to ensure near-0 performance loss for causal language modeling. Experiments show that ScaleSearch reduces quantization error by 27% for NVFP4 and improves language model PTQ by up to 15 points for MATH500 (Qwen3-8B), while ScaleSearchAttention im- proves Wikitext-2 PPL by upto 0.77 points for Llama 3.1 70B. The proposed methods closely match baseline performance while providing quantization accuracy improvements.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly