MTraining: Distributed Dynamic Sparse Attention for Efficient Ultra-Long Context Training
MTraining: Distributed Dynamic Sparse Attention for Efficient Ultra-Long Context Training
Wenxuan Li, Chengruidong Zhang, Huiqiang Jiang, Yucheng Li, Yuqing Yang, Lili Qiu
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The adoption of long context windows has become a standard feature in Large Language Models (LLMs), as extended contexts significantly enhance their capacity for complex reasoning and broaden their applicability across diverse scenarios. Dynamic sparse attention is a promising approach for reducing the computational cost of long-context training. However, efficiently training LLMs with dynamic sparse attention on ultra-long contexts, especially in distributed settings, remains a significant challenge, largely due to worker- and step-level imbalance. This paper introduces MTraining, a novel distributed methodology leveraging dynamic sparse attention to enable efficient training for LLMs with ultra-long contexts. Specifically, MTraining integrates three key components: a distributed sparse index approximating algorithm, balanced sparse ring attention, and hierarchical sparse ring attention. These components are designed to synergistically address the computational imbalance and communication overheads inherent in dynamic sparse attention mechanisms during training LLMs with extensive context lengths. We demonstrate the efficacy of MTraining mainly by training Qwen2.5-3B and Llama-3.1-8B, successfully expanding its context window from 32K/128K to 512K tokens on a cluster of 32$\times$ A100 GPUs. Our evaluations on a comprehensive suite of downstream tasks, including RULER, PG-19, InfiniteBench, and NIAH, reveal that MTraining achieves up to a 6x higher training throughput while preserving model accuracy. The core code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/MInference/tree/main/mtraining.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly