AXLearn: Modular, Hardware-Agnostic Large Model Training
AXLearn: Modular, Hardware-Agnostic Large Model Training
Mark Lee, Chang Lan, Tom Gunter, John Peebles, Hanzhi Zhou, Xuan Kelvin Zou, Sneha Bangalore, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Nan Du, Xianzhi Du, Philipp Dufter, Liang He, Ruixuan Hou, Haoshuo Huang, Dongseong Hwang, Xiang Kong, Jinhao Lei, Tao Lei, Ethan Li, Li Li, Jiarui Lu, Zhiyun Lu, Yiping Ma, David Qiu, Vivek Rathod, Senyu Tong, Zhucheng Tu, Chong Wang, Jianyu Wang, Yongqiang Wang, Zirui Wang, Floris Weers, Sam Wiseman, Guoli Yin, Bowen Zhang, Xiyou Zhou, Danyang Zhuo, Cheng Leong, Ruoming Pang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
AXLearn is a production system which facilitates scalable and high-performance training of large deep learning models. Compared to other state-of-the-art deep learning systems, AXLearn has a unique focus on modularity and support for hardware-agnostic training. AXLearn's internal interfaces between software components follow strict encapsulation, allowing different components to be assembled to facilitate rapid model development and experimentation on different hardware infrastructure. AXLearn maintains constant complexity as we scale the components in the system, compared to linear or quadratic complexity in state-of-the-art training systems. This allows integrating features such as Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE) into AXLearn across hundreds of modules with just 10 lines of code, compared to hundreds, as required in other systems. At the same time, AXLearn maintains equivalent performance compared to state-of-the-art training systems. We also share our experience in the development and operation of AXLearn at Apple.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly