DreamDDP: Accelerating Low-Bandwidth Geo-Distributed LLM Training with Layer-wise Partial Synchronization
DreamDDP: Accelerating Low-Bandwidth Geo-Distributed LLM Training with Layer-wise Partial Synchronization
zhenheng Tang, Zichen TANG, Junlin Huang, Xinglin Pan, Rudan Yan, Yuxin Wang, Amelie Chi Zhou, Shaohuai Shi, Xiaowen Chu, Bo Li
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Scaling up training large language models (LLMs) in computing and data perspectives motivates distributed training across different geo-distributed data centers. Communication in geo-distributed data parallel training (DDP) with stochastic gradient descent (S-SGD) is the main bottleneck in low-bandwidth environments. Recent studies have successfully applied Local SGD to mitigate the communication overhead and geo-distributedly pre-train LLMs. However, we identify that the strict model synchronization mechanism in Local SGD prevents overlapping communication and computation, which makes the system lose opportunities to overlap communication and computation.
To overcome this limitation, we expand the design space of local SGD by layer-wisely decoupling model synchronization. In each iteration, only partial layers are synchronized instead of the entire model after a specific number of iterations.   Leveraging this methodology, we introduce DreamDDP, a training framework to accelerate low-bandwidth distributed training with three key innovations: (1) partial local SGD with theoretical assurances of convergence rates comparable to S-SGD; (2) overlapping parameter synchronization with computation without extra GPU memory occupation; (3) identifying and exploiting three properties to schedule communication and computation based on fine-grained layer-wise profiling to reduce training time. Empirical evaluations conducted on 32 GPUs using prominent deep learning models, including ResNet-18, ResNet-50, GPT-2, and Llama-2, demonstrate that DreamDDP enhances the convergence properties of Local SGD (and Adam) and achieves speedups ranging from $1.49\times$ to $3.91\times$ over leading baseline methods.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly