Automated Algorithm Design for Auto-Tuning Optimizers
Automated Algorithm Design for Auto-Tuning Optimizers
Floris-Jan Willemsen, Niki van Stein, Ben van Werkhoven
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Automatic performance tuning (auto-tuning) is essential for optimizing high-performance applications, where vast and irregular search spaces make manual exploration infeasible.
While auto-tuners traditionally rely on classical approaches such as evolutionary, annealing, or surrogate-based optimizers, designing algorithms that efficiently find near-optimal configurations robustly across diverse tasks is challenging.
We propose a new paradigm: using large language models (LLMs) to automatically generate optimization algorithms tailored to auto-tuning problems.
We introduce a framework that prompts LLMs with problem descriptions and search space characteristics to synthesize, test, and iteratively refine specialized optimizers.
These generated algorithms are evaluated on four real-world auto-tuning applications across six hardware platforms and compared against the state-of-the-art in two contemporary auto-tuning frameworks. 
The evaluation demonstrates that providing additional application- and search space-specific information in the generation stage results in an average performance improvement of 30.7% and 14.6%, respectively. 
In addition, our results show that LLM-generated optimizers can rival, and in various cases outperform, existing human-designed algorithms, with our best-performing generated optimization algorithms achieving an average 72.4% improvement over state-of-the-art optimizers for auto-tuning.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly