BOOST: BOttleneck-Optimized Scalable Training Framework for Low-Rank Large Language Models
BOOST: BOttleneck-Optimized Scalable Training Framework for Low-Rank Large Language Models
Zhengyang Wang, Ziyue Liu, Ruijie Zhang, Avinash Maurya, Bogdan Nicolae, Paul Hovland, Franck Cappello, Zheng Zhang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The scale of transformer model pre-training is constrained by the increasing computation and communication cost. Low-rank bottleneck architectures offer a promising solution to significantly reduce the training time and memory footprint with minimum impact on accuracy. Despite algorithmic efficiency, bottleneck architectures scale poorly under standard tensor parallelism. Simply applying 3D parallelism designed for full-rank
methods leads to excessive communication and poor GPU utilization. To address this limitation, we propose BOOST, an efficient training framework tailored for large-scale low-rank bottleneck architectures. BOOST introduces a novel Bottleneck-aware Tensor Parallelism, and combines optimizations such as online-RMSNorm, linear layer grouping, and low-rank activation checkpointing to achieve end-to-end training speedup. Evaluations on different low-rank bottleneck architectures demonstrate that BOOST achieves 1.46–1.91$\times$ speedup over full-rank model baselines and 1.87–2.27$\times$ speedup over low-rank model with naively integrated 3D parallelism, with improved GPU utilization and reduced communication overhead.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly