fabric-lib: RDMA Point-to-Point Communication for LLM Systems
fabric-lib: RDMA Point-to-Point Communication for LLM Systems
Nandor Licker, Kevin Hu, Vladimir Zaytsev, Lequn Chen
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Emerging Large Language Model (LLM) system patterns, such as disaggregated inference, Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) routing, and asynchronous reinforcement fine-tuning, require flexible point-to-point communication beyond simple collectives.
Existing implementations are locked to specific Network Interface Controllers (NICs), hindering integration into inference engines and portability across hardware providers.
We present fabric-lib, which bridges the functionality of common NICs to expose a uniform interface.
fabric-lib exposes one-sided WriteImm operations with a ImmCounter primitive for completion notification, without ordering assumptions of network transport, transparently managing multiple NICs per GPU.
We demonstrate peak throughput of 400 Gbps on both NVIDIA ConnectX-7 and AWS Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA).
We showcase fabric-lib through three production systems: (1) KvCache transfer for disaggregated inference with dynamic scaling, (2) RL weight updates achieving 1.3 seconds for trillion-parameter models, and (3) MoE dispatch/combine  implementation exceeding DeepEP decode latency on ConnectX-7, with the first viable latencies on EFA. We demonstrate that our portable point-to-point communication complements collectives while avoiding lock-in.
fabric-lib is open-sourced at https://github.com/perplexityai/pplx-garden/.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly