Flashlight: PyTorch Compiler Extensions to Accelerate Attention Variants
Flashlight: PyTorch Compiler Extensions to Accelerate Attention Variants
Bozhi You, Irene Wang, Zelal Su Mustafaoglu, Abhinav Jangda, Angélica Moreira, Roshan Dathathri, Divya Mahajan, Keshav Pingali
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Attention is a fundamental building block of large language models (LLMs), so there have been many efforts to implement it efficiently. For example, FlashAttention leverages tiling and kernel fusion to optimize attention. Recently, a number of variants of attention have been introduced to enhance model quality or efficiency. Supporting them efficiently remains difficult since they usually require specialized kernels or hand-tuned implementations. FlexAttention recently addressed part of this gap by using static programming templates to support FlashAttention-like kernels for a subset of attention variants.
In this paper, we introduce Flashlight, a compiler-native framework within the PyTorch ecosystem that automatically generates fused, FlashAttention-style kernels for arbitrary attention-based programs, without relying on static templates or predefined kernel specializations. Flashlight leverages PyTorch’s compilation workflow to fuse and tile attention computations transparently, enabling efficient execution for diverse attention patterns. Not only does it support all variants expressible in the FlexAttention model but it also handles more general, data-dependent attention formulations that are beyond the capabilities of FlexAttention.
Our results show that Flashlight produces kernels with competitive or superior performance to FlexAttention, while offering the flexibility of native PyTorch code, enabling developers to rapidly explore  new attention models without sacrificing performance.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly