Pylo: Towards Accessible Learned Optimizers in PyTorch
Pylo: Towards Accessible Learned Optimizers in PyTorch
Paul Janson, Benjamin Thérien, Quentin Anthony, Xiaolong Huang, Abhinav Moudgil, Eugene Belilovsky
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 8  (MLSys 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Learned optimizers have been an active research topic over the past decade, with increasing progress toward practical, general-purpose optimizers that can serve as drop-in replacements for widely used methods like Adam. However, recent advances such as VeLO, which was meta-trained for 4000 TPU-months, remain largely inaccessible to the broader community, in part due to their reliance on JAX and the absence of user-friendly packages for independently using the optimizers after meta-training. To address this gap, we introduce PyLO, a PyTorch-based library that brings learned optimizers to the remaining ≈ 70% of machine learning community via the familiar torch.optim.Optimizer interface. Unlike prior work focused on limited-scale academic tasks, our
emphasis is on applying learned optimization to real-world large-scale pre-training tasks. Our systems contribution includes CUDA-accelerated implementations of the small fc lopt(Metz et al.,  2022a) and VeLO(Metz et al., 2022b) learned optimizers, achieving substantial performance gains, with training throughput on ViT-B/16 (batch size 32) increasing from 39.36 and 49.73 to 205.59 and 191.18 samples per second, respectively. PyLO has the versatility that allows us to easily combine learned optimizers with existing optimization tools such as learning rate schedules and weight decay. When doing so, we discover that learned optimizers can substantially benefit from it. Our code is available at https://github.com/Belilovsky-Lab/pylo
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly