 Extending GPU Ray-Traci
              Search Acc
                                       Aaron Barnes, Fangjia Sh
                                  Elmore Family School of Electric
                                                       Purdue Un
                                                   West Lafayette
                                          {barnes88, shen449, tim


   Abstract—Specialized ray-tracing acceleration units have be-
come a common feature in GPU hardware, enabling real-time
ray-tracing of complex scenes for the first time. The ray-tracing
unit accelerates the traversal of a hierarchical tree data structure
called a bounding volume hierarchy to determine whether rays
have intersected triangle primitives. Hierarchical search algo-
rithms are a fundamental software pattern common in many
important domains, such as recommendation systems and point
cloud registration, but are difficult for GPUs to accelerate because
they are characterized by extensive branching and recursion.
The ray-tracing unit overcomes these limitations with specialized
hardware to traverse hierarchical data structures efficiently, but
is mired by a highly specialized graphics API, which is not
readily adaptable to general-purpose computation. We present
the Hierarchical Search Unit (HSU), a flexible datapath to
accelerate a more general class of hierarchical search algorithms,
of which ray-tracing is one. We synthesize a baseline ray-
intersection datapath and maximize functional unit reuse while
extending the ray-tracing unit to support additional computations
and a more general set of instructions. We demonstrate that
the unit can improve the performance of three hierarchical
search data structures in approximate nearest neighbors search
algorithms and a B-tree key-value store index. For a minimal
extension to the existing unit, our HSU improves the state-of-
the-art GPU approximate nearest neighbor implementation by an
average of 24.8% using the GPU’s general computing interface.
   Index Terms—GPU, Ray-Tracing, BVH, Nearest Neighbors

                       I. I NTRODUCTION
   Ray-traced (RT) rendering generates photo-realistic images
by casting millions of rays into a scene and generating
pixel colors based on the objects they intersect with [23],
[64]. While such techniques often generate computer graphics
of a higher quality than traditional rasterization techniques,
the large number of ray-triangle intersection computations
required had prevented their adoption in applications with real-
time rendering requirements until the introduction of dedicated
RT hardware accelerators [44]. To reduce the number of
intersection tests required for a given ray, scene primitives
(commonly triangles) are organized in data structures such as
Bounding Volume Hierarchies (BVH), which allow the search
space to be culled by hierarchically eliminating candidate
primitives. RT units accelerate the traversal of BVH trees, and
the ray-triangle intersection tests computed upon reaching a
leaf node.
   There are two primary benefits the RT unit provides over
traditional GPU SIMT hardware: it improves throughput in
