                    Generalizing Ray Tr
                        for Tree Traver
        Dongho Ha1,2                             Lufei Liu1
       Yonsei University              University of British Columbia
     Seoul, South Korea                    Vancouver, Canada
   dongho.ha@yonsei.ac.kr                liulufei@student.ubc.ca

               Won Woo Ro                                   Hung-Wei Tsen
             Yonsei University                       University of California
           Seoul, South Korea                                Riverside, USA
            wro@yonsei.ac.kr                                  htseng@ucr.edu



   Abstract—Tree traversal is a fundamental operation in many
applications, such as database indexing and physics simula-
tions. Although tree traversals feature high parallelism, they
are inherently divergent and irregular, leading to inefficient
performance on GPUs. Tree traversals are also prevalent in ray
tracing, which is executed on dedicated Ray-Tracing Accelerators
(RTAs) in modern GPUs to mitigate inefficiencies such as control
flow divergence and underutilization of memory bandwidth by
irregular memory accesses. In this paper, we propose the Tree
Traversal Accelerator (TTA) to replicate the success of RTAs
in ray tracing for general tree traversal applications. TTAs
extend RTAs to support tree structures and operations beyond
those in ray tracing, such as B-Tree search and radius search
algorithms, by modifying existing computing units. Despite TTAs’
effectiveness, they still rely on fixed-function computations, making
it challenging to support other tree-based applications such as N-
Body simulation fully. Thus, we introduce TTA+ as an alternative
design, which modularizes the RTA computing units and makes
them programmable, trading some efficiency for flexibility. With
less than 1% increase in RTA area, our proposals can achieve up
to 5.4× speedup for B-Tree search, 1.7× for N-Body simulation,
and 1.2× for select ray-tracing applications.
   Index Terms—GPU, Accelerator, Tree Traversal

                          I. I NTRODUCTION
  Tree data structures are used to efficiently organize and
search data across a variety of domains and are increasingly
important in our data-driven world. These structures are
particularly prevalent in web indexing, databases, data mining,
and file systems, where B-Trees [82], B+Trees [17], and R-
Trees [27] are used to index data for fast retrieval. Database
queries feature high parallelism [55], motivating the Niagara
system [68] and making them an excellent candidate for
execution on the massively parallel Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU). However, tree-based indexing is inherently irregular and
divergent, which leads to inefficient performance on modern
GPUs [7], [96].
  1 Both authors contributed equally to this work.
  2 The author is working at MangoBoost (dongho.ha@mangoboost.io) now.
This paper is done when the author was a visiting scholar at University of
California, Riverside




                                                                             1
