Controlled Preemption: Amplifying Side-Channel
Attacks from Userspace
Yongye Zhu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
yongye.zhu@berkeley.edu
Boru Chen
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
boruchen@berkeley.edu
Zirui Neil Zhao
NVIDIA/The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
neil.zhao@utexas.edu
Christopher W. Fletcher
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
cwfletcher@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Microarchitectural side channels are an ongoing threat in
today’s systems. Yet, many side-channel methodologies suf-
fer from low temporal resolution measurement, which can
either preclude or significantly complicate an attack.
This paper introduces Controlled Preemption, an attack
primitive enabling a single unprivileged (user-level) attacker
thread to repeatedly preempt a victim thread after colocat-
ing with that victim thread on the same logical core. Be-
tween preemptions, the victim thread executes zero to sev-
eral instructions—sufficiently few to enable high-resolution
side channel measurements.
The key idea in Controlled Preemption is to exploit sched-
uler fairness heuristics. Namely, that modern thread sched-
ulers give a thread 𝐴 the ability to preempt another thread 𝐵
until a fairness tripwire (signaling that 𝐴 is starving 𝐵) fires.
We show how this idea enables hundreds of short preemp-
tions before tripping the fairness tripwire is robust to noise
and applies to both the Linux CFS and EEVDF schedulers.
We also develop a technique that helps colocate the attacker
and victim threads onto the same logical core, an attacker
capability overlooked by prior work.
Our evaluation tests Controlled Preemption in the context
of several different victim programs, victim privilege levels
(inside and outside of Intel SGX) and choices of side channel.
In each attack, we demonstrate results that are competitive
with prior work but make fewer assumptions (e.g., require
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3715985
only user-level privilege or require fewer colocated attacker
threads).
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Side-channel
analysis and countermeasures.
Keywords: Microarchitectural side-channel attacks; Attack
primitives; Temporal resolution; Completely Fair Scheduler;
Earliest Eligible Virtual Deadline First Scheduler
ACM Reference Format:
Yongye Zhu, Boru Chen, Zirui Neil Zhao, and Christopher W.
Fletcher. 2025. Controlled Preemption: Amplifying Side-Channel At-
tacks from Userspace. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3715985
1 Introduction
Microarchitectural side-channel attacks exploit the hard-
ware resources shared between mutually distrusting pro-
grams [8, 19, 26–28, 40, 42, 72, 73]. In such attacks, an at-
tacker program monitors a victim program’s utilization of
shared resources to infer sensitive victim information like
cryptographic keys [15, 19, 24, 26, 28, 45, 73, 74]. These at-
tacks pose a serious threat to both commercial multi-tenant
cloud environments [32, 53, 81] and local client environ-
ments [40, 42, 56].
A fundamental characteristic in any microarchitectural
side-channel attack is its temporal resolution, i.e., the num-
ber of victim instructions that execute/retire in between
attacker measurements. Higher temporal resolution enables
new attacks or otherwise significantly reduces the require-
ments of existing attacks. Consider for example the T-table
AES first-round attack [28, 48]. Given perfect temporal res-
olution, a cache-timing attack on the T-Tables can extract
the key after the AES routine runs a single time. By con-
trast, an attack with low temporal resolution (e.g., concur-
rently/continuously measuring the channel or measuring
the channel once after the AES routine completes) requires
