Clapton: Clifford Assisted Problem Transformation for
Error Mitigation in Variational Quantum Algorithms
Lennart Maximilian Seifert
lmseifert@uchicago.edu
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
Siddharth Dangwal
siddharthdangwal@uchicago.edu
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
Frederic T. Chong
chong@cs.uchicago.edu
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
Gokul Subramanian Ravi
gsravi@umich.edu
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Abstract
Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) show potential for
quantum advantage in the near term of quantum computing,
but demand a level of accuracy that surpasses the current ca-
pabilities of NISQ devices. To systematically mitigate the im-
pact of quantum device error on VQAs, we propose Clapton:
Clifford-Assisted Problem Transformation for Error Mitiga-
tion in Variational Quantum Algorithms. Clapton leverages
classically estimated good quantum states for a given VQA
problem, classical simulable models of device noise, and the
variational principle for VQAs. It applies transformations
on the VQA problem’s Hamiltonian to lower the energy es-
timates of known good VQA states in the presence of the
modeled device noise. The Clapton hypothesis is that as long
as the known good states of the VQA problem are close to the
problem’s ideal ground state and the device noise modeling
is reasonably accurate (both of which are generally true),
then the Clapton transformation substantially decreases the
impact of device noise on the ground state of the VQA prob-
lem, thereby increasing the accuracy of the VQA solution.
Clapton is built as an end-to-end application-to-device frame-
work and achieves mean VQA initialization improvements
of 1.7x to 3.7x, and up to a maximum of 13.3x, over the state-
of-the-art baseline when evaluated for a variety of scientific
applications from physics and chemistry on noise models
and real quantum devices.
1 Introduction
Quantum computers are known to have the disruptive po-
tential to provide a significant boost in computing capability,
especially in important domains such as chemistry [24], op-
timization [31], and machine learning [5]. They leverage
unique principles of quantum mechanics like superposition,
interference, and entanglement, which are beyond the capac-
ity of classical computing, thereby enabling them to tackle
problems that are considerably (sometimes exponentially)
harder to solve on state-of-the-art classical computers.
In the near and intermediate future of quantum comput-
ing, we have to work with noisy intermediate-scale quantum
(NISQ) devices [37]. These devices are characterized by lim-
ited qubit quantity and quality. Their potential is constrained
by issues like finite qubit coherence, imperfect state prepa-
ration and measurement operations (SPAM errors), gate er-
rors and crosstalk. Therefore, they fall short when it comes
to executing large-scale quantum algorithms that demand
full fault-tolerance with error correction involving millions
of qubits [34]. Despite these limitations, there is potential
for near-term quantum advantage in certain tasks such as
optimization [15], physics [27], and chemistry [35]. NISQ
algorithms for these tasks have some inherent robustness
to noise, which allows them to provide potentially useful
results even without quantum error correction.
An important family of such algorithms are variational
quantum algorithms (VQAs). VQAs have a diverse range
of applications such as estimating the electronic energy of
molecules [35] and approximating MAXCUT problems [15].
They are hybrid algorithms: The quantum circuits, which
are executed on a quantum machine, are parameterized by a
set of angles which is tuned by a classical optimizer. Over
numerous iterations the VQA searches the quantum space to
find the minimum “energy” of a target objective, which cor-
responds to the solution of the problem. The corresponding
quantum state is called the problem’s “ground state”.
However, even VQAs and other NISQ algorithms can sus-
tain noise strengths only up to certain limits, and techniques
that can reduce the effects of noise-induced errors are of
paramount importance. Multiple proposals of such error mit-
igation methods have emerged over the past decade [4, 8,
12, 14, 18, 28, 41, 48, 50, 54] and they have considerably im-
proved the result quality of quantum algorithms. However,
there is still a long way to go – despite the implementation
of error mitigation techniques, the accuracy of VQAs on
current NISQ machines often falls notably short of the strin-
gent precision requirements essential in fields like molecular
chemistry, particularly as the scale of problems grows. Thus,
novel error mitigation techniques tailored to VQAs can sub-
stantially enhance their real-world utility.
1
arXiv:2406.15721v1
[quant-ph]
22
Jun
2024
