FloatAP: Supporting
Floating-Point Arithmetic
Kailin Yang
Computer Systems Laboratory
Cornell University*
Ithaca, NY, USA
ky362@cornell.edu

Abstract—Associative Processors (AP) enable in-situ, dataparallel computation in content-addressable memories (CAM).
In particular, arithmetic operations are accomplished via bitserial sequences of bulk search and update primitives. The dataparallel nature of AP-based computation, whereby thousands of
operations can take place concurrently, more than makes up
for the slowness of its bit-serial arithmetic; as a result, APs
can deliver very high performance. Indeed, recent AP proposals
have shown promising results across various application domains,
primarily for integer codes. However, floating-point (FP) support
is crucial for many critical AI/ML and scientific workloads.
This paper introduces FloatAP, the first highly programmable
AP architecture tailored for high-performance FP arithmetic. We
show that the straightforward application of AP-based bit-serial
arithmetic to FP leads to insufficient computational throughput. With FloatAP, we propose a bit- and component-parallel
vector mantissa alignment method that significantly improves
the throughput of vector FP addition and reduction. We also
repurpose the existing adder trees in modern APs to efficiently
implement multiplication and dot product operations, markedly
outperforming AP’s traditional bit-serial multiplication.
FloatAP is flexible enough to accommodate different FP
formats while maintaining high utilization and integer compatibility. It is programmable using RISC-V ‘V’ vector extension
and easily accommodates domain-specific languages and ML
frameworks. We evaluate FloatAP using contemporary ML
workloads, including CNN-, RNN-, and LLM-based parallel
codes. The results show that, on average, FloatAP achieves 2.7×
higher inference throughput compared to an area-equivalent
NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU for single-precision FP (1.5× for
bfloat16) and 2.4× higher energy efficiency (1.6× for bfloat16).
Index Terms—floating-point, processing-in-memory, associative processor, content-addressable memory

I. I NTRODUCTION
Associative Processing (AP) is a decades-old processingin-memory (PIM) paradigm [16], [37], [38] that utilizes
sequences of parallel search and bulk update primitives
on content-addressable memory (CAM) to implement dataparallel in-situ computation. Recently, AP has regained attention from researchers thanks to today’s prevailing parallel
applications, the need to address the von Neumann bottleneck, and advances in CAM bit-cell technologies [11],
This work is supported by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC)
through the Center for Research on Intelligent Storage and Processing-inmemory (CRISP) and ACE Center for Evolvable Computing (ACE).
*Kailin Yang now works at ByteDance Ltd. in San José, CA, USA.

