SCALE: A Structure-C
Message Passing Gra

Lingxiang Yin* , Sanjay Gandha

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
{lingxiang.yin, sanjay.gandham
Abstract—Message passing paradigm has been widely used
in developing complex Graph Neural Network (GNN) models,
allowing for concise representations of edge and vertex-wise
operations. Despite its pivotal role in theoretical advancement,
the respective expression of edge and vertex operations, along
with evolving GNN variants and datasets, has inevitably led
to enormous computational complexity due to heterogeneous
computation kernels. In particular, such inconsistent computation
characteristics present new challenges in leveraging intermediate
data reuse, ensuring both edge and vertex-wise workload balance,
and sustaining system scalability.
In this paper, we propose a structure-centric accelerator,
SCALE, that can support a variety of message passing GNN
models with improved parallelism, data reuse, and scalability.
The central idea is to find latent similarities among GNN
primitives such as shared dataflow structure, rather than strictly
adhering to heterogeneous model structure. This serves as a
hinge to homogenize inconsistencies in various GNN computation
kernels. To accomplish this concept, SCALE consists of three
unique designs, a novel systolic array-like architecture, a degree
and vertex-aware scheduling, and a coherent dataflow tailored
for fused graph and neural operations. The proposed systolic
array-like architecture can support varying dataflows such as allreduce, of distinct GNN operations improving parallelism, data
reuse, and throughput. The degree and vertex-aware scheduling
can remedy the workload imbalance encountered in vertex and
edge-wise operations. Moreover, the proposed dataflow can unify
the data movement of both graph and neural operators without
extra communication and storage overheads. Our simulation
results show that SCALE achieves 1.82× speedup and 38.9%
energy reduction on average over the state-of-the-art GNN
accelerators [1]–[4].

I. I NTRODUCTION
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a promising model to comprehend complex graph-structured data,
showing satisfactory performance in various applications such
as social networks [5]–[7], recommendation systems [8]–[10],
and bioinformatics [11]–[14]. In light of recent theoretical advancements, GNN models now incorporate complex edge and
vertex-wise operations to capture nuanced graph structures and
semantics. Such complex operations are typically expressed
using the message passing paradigm in deep learning libraries
such as Deep Graph Library and Pytorch Geometric. Yet,
despite its importance, message passing GNN poses escalating
computational and communication challenges on the hardware
due to intricate vertex and edge-wise operations.
Even though significant efforts [15]–[21] have been devoted to facilitating Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN),
* Equal Contribution. ‡ Corresponding Author.

