AdaParse: An Adaptive Parallel PDF Parsing and Resource Scaling Engine
AdaParse: An Adaptive Parallel PDF Parsing and Resource Scaling Engine
Carlo Siebenschuh, Kyle Hippe, Ozan Gokdemir, Alexander Brace, Arham Mushtaq Khan, Khalid Hossain, Yadu Babuji, Nicholas Chia, Venkatram Vishwanath, Arvind Ramanathan, Rick L. Stevens, Ian Foster, Robert Underwood
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Language models for scientific tasks are trained on text from scientific publications---most distributed as PDFs that require parsing. PDF parsing approaches range from inexpensive heuristics (for simple documents) to computationally intensive ML‑driven systems (for complex or degraded ones). The choice of the ``best'' parser for a particular document depends on 1) its computational cost and 2) the accuracy of its output. To address these issues, we introduce an Adaptive Parallel PDF Parsing and Resource Scaling Engine (AdaParse), a data-driven strategy for assigning an appropriate parser to each document. We enlist scientists to select preferred parser outputs and incorporate this information through direct preference optimization (DPO) into AdaParse, thereby aligning its selection process with human judgment. AdaParse then incorporates hardware requirements and (aligned) predicted accuracy of each parser to orchestrate computational resources efficiently for large-scale parsing campaigns. We demonstrate that AdaParse, when compared to state-of-the-art parsers, improves throughput by 17$\times$ while still achieving comparable accuracy (actually, 0.2\% better) on a benchmark set of 1000 scientific documents. AdaParse's combination of high accuracy and parallel scalability makes it feasible to parse large-scale scientific document corpora to support the development of high-quality, trillion-token-scale text datasets. The implementation is available at \url{https://github.com/7shoe/AdaParse/}.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly