NEO: Saving GPU Memory Crisis with CPU Offloading for Online LLM Inference
NEO: Saving GPU Memory Crisis with CPU Offloading for Online LLM Inference
Xuanlin Jiang, Yang Zhou, Shiyi Cao, Ion Stoica, Minlan Yu
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Online LLM inference powers many exciting applications such as intelligent chatbots and autonomous agents.
Modern LLM inference engines widely rely on request batching to improve inference throughput, aiming to make
it cost-efficient when running on expensive GPU accelerators. However, the limited GPU memory has largely
limited the batch size achieved in practice, leaving significant GPU compute resources wasted.
We present NEO, an online LLM inference system that offloads part of attention compute and KV cache states
from the GPU to the local host CPU, effectively increasing the GPU batch size and thus inference throughput. To
this end, NEO proposes asymmetric GPU-CPU pipelining and load-aware scheduling to balance GPU and CPU
loads and fully utilize their compute and memory resources. We evaluate NEO on a wide range of workloads (i.e.,
code generation, text summarization), GPUs (i.e., T4, A10G, H100), and LLM models (i.e., 7B, 8B, 70B). NEO
achieves up to 7.5×, 26%, and 14% higher throughput compared to GPU-only approach on T4, A10G, and H100
GPUs, respectively, while maintaining the same latency; with more powerful CPUs, NEO achieves up to 79.3%
throughput gain on A10G GPU. To facilitate future research, we open-source our code at https://github.com/NEO-MLSys25/NEO.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly