Efficient LLM Inference using Dynamic Input Pruning and Cache-Aware Masking
Efficient LLM Inference using Dynamic Input Pruning and Cache-Aware Masking
Marco Federici, Davide Belli, Mart Van Baalen, Amir Jalalirad, Andrii Skliar, Bence Major, Markus Nagel, Paul Whatmough
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
While mobile devices provide ever more compute power, improvements in DRAM bandwidth are much slower.
This is unfortunate for large language model (LLM) token generation, which is heavily memory-bound.
Previous work has proposed to leverage natural dynamic activation sparsity in ReLU-activated LLMs to reduce effective DRAM bandwidth per token.
However, more recent LLMs use SwiGLU instead of ReLU, which results in little inherent sparsity. While SwiGLU activations can be pruned based on magnitude, the resulting sparsity patterns are difficult to predict, rendering previous approaches ineffective.
To circumvent this issue, our work introduces Dynamic Input Pruning (DIP): a predictor-free dynamic sparsification approach,
which preserves accuracy with minimal fine-tuning.
DIP can further use lightweight LoRA adapters to regain some performance lost during sparsification. 
Lastly, we describe a novel cache-aware masking strategy, which considers the cache state and activation magnitude to further increase cache hit rate, improving LLM token rate on mobile devices.
DIP outperforms other methods in terms of accuracy, memory and throughput trade-offs across simulated hardware settings. 
On Phi-3-Medium, DIP achieves a 46\% reduction in memory and 40\% increase in throughput with $<$ 0.1 loss in perplexity when compared to streaming the dense model from Flash.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly