MEADOW: Memory-efficient Dataflow and Data Packing for Low Power Edge LLMs
MEADOW: Memory-efficient Dataflow and Data Packing for Low Power Edge LLMs
Abhishek Moitra, Arkapravo Ghosh, Shrey Agrawal, Aporva Amarnath, Karthik Swaminathan, Priyadarshini Panda
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The computational and memory challenges of large language models (LLMs) have sparked several optimization approaches towards their efficient implementation. While prior LLM-targeted quantization, and prior works on sparse acceleration have significantly mitigated the memory and computation bottleneck, they do so assuming high power platforms such as GPUs and server-class FPGAs with large off-chip memory bandwidths and employ a generalized matrix multiplication (GEMM) execution of all the layers in the decoder. In such a GEMM-based execution, data is fetched from an off-chip memory, computed and stored back. However, at reduced off-chip memory capacities, as is the case with low-power edge devices, this implementation strategy significantly increases the attention computation latency owing to the repeated storage and fetch of large intermediate tokens to and from the off-chip memory. Moreover, fetching the weight matrices from a bandwidth constrained memory further aggravates the memory bottleneck problem. To this end, we introduce MEADOW, a framework that significantly reduces the off-chip memory access for LLMs with a novel token-parallel head-sequential (TPHS) dataflow. Additionally, MEADOW applies weight packing, that performs loss-less decomposition of large weight matrices to their unique elements thereby, reducing the enormous weight fetch latency. MEADOW demonstrates 1.5$\times$ and 2.5 $\times$ lower decode and prefill latency, respectively, compared to a GEMM-based LLM implementation on the low power Xilinx ZCU102 FPGA platform that consumes less than 10W. Additionally, MEADOW achieves an end-to-end latency improvement of over 40\%, compared to prior LLM optimization works.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly