ProtoRAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud
ProtoRAIL: A Risk-cognizant Imitation Agent for Adaptive vCPU Oversubscription In the Cloud
Lu Wang, Mayukh Das, Fangkai Yang, Bo Qiao, Hang Dong, Si Qin, Victor Rühle, Chetan Bansal, Eli Cortez, Íñigo Goiri, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Safe optimization of operating costs is one of the holy grails of successful revenue-generating cloud systems and capacity/resource efficiency is a key factor in making that a reality. Among other strategies for resource efficiency across major cloud providers, Oversubscription is an extremely  prevalent practice where more virtual resources are offered than actual physical capacity to minimize revenue loss against redundant capacity. While resources can be of any type, including compute, memory, power or network bandwidth, we highlight the scenario of virtual CPU (vCPU) oversubscription since vCPU cores are primarily the billable units for cloud services and has substantial impact on business as well as users. For a seamless cloud experience, while being cost-efficient for the provider, suitable policies for controlling oversubscription margins are crucial. Narrow margins lead to redundant expenditure on under-utilized resource capacity, and wider margins lead to under-provisioning where customer workloads may suffer from resource contention. 

Most oversubscription policies today are engineered either with tribal knowledge or with static heuristics about the system, which lead to catastrophic overloading or stranded/under-utilized resources. Smart oversubscription policies that can adapt to demand/utilization patterns across time and granularity to jointly optimize cost benefits and risks is a non-trivial, largely, unsolved problem. We address this challenge with our proposed novel  Prototypical Risk-cognizant Active Imitation Learning (ProtoRAIL) framework that exploits approximate symmetries in utilization patterns to learn suitable policies. The active knowledge-in-the-loop (KITL) module de-risks the learned policies. 
Our empirical investigations and real deployments on Microsoft's internal (1$^{st}$ party) cloud service, show orders of magnitude reduction ($\approx \geq 90\times$) in risk and significant increase in benefits (saved stranded resources: in a range of $\approx 7 -10 $\%).
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly