SparseTransX: Efficient Training of Translation-Based Knowledge Graph Embeddings Using Sparse Matrix Operations
SparseTransX: Efficient Training of Translation-Based Knowledge Graph Embeddings Using Sparse Matrix Operations
Md Saidul Hoque Anik, Ariful Azad
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Knowledge graph (KG) learning offers a powerful framework for generating new knowledge and making inferences. Training KG embedding can take a significantly long time, especially for larger datasets. Our analysis shows that the gradient computation of embedding is one of the dominant functions in the translation-based KG embedding training loop. We address this issue by replacing the core embedding computation with SpMM (Sparse-Dense Matrix Multiplication) kernels. This allows us to unify multiple scatter (and gather) operations as a single operation, reducing training time and memory usage. We create a general framework for training KG models using sparse kernels and implement four models, namely TransE, TransR, TransH, and TorusE. Our sparse implementations exhibit up to 5.3x speedup on the CPU and up to 4.2x speedup on the GPU with a significantly low GPU memory footprint. The speedups are consistent across large and small datasets for a given model. Our proposed sparse approach can be extended to accelerate other translation-based (such as TransC, TransM, etc.) and non-translational (such as DistMult, ComplEx, RotatE, etc.) models as well. An implementation of the SpTransX framework is publicly available as a Python package in https://github.com/HipGraph/SpTransX.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly