Know Where You’re Uncertain When Planning with Multimodal Foundation Models: A Formal Framework
Know Where You’re Uncertain When Planning with Multimodal Foundation Models: A Formal Framework
Neel P. Bhatt, Yunhao Yang, Rohan Siva, Daniel Milan, Ufuk Topcu, Zhangyang Wang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Multimodal foundation models offer a promising framework for robotic perception and planning by processing sensory inputs to generate actionable plans. However, addressing uncertainty in both perception (sensory interpretation) and decision-making (plan generation) remains a critical challenge for ensuring task reliability. This paper presents a comprehensive framework to disentangle, quantify, and mitigate these two forms of uncertainty. We first introduce a framework for uncertainty $\textit{disentanglement}$, isolating $\textit{perception uncertainty}$ arising from limitations in visual understanding and $\textit{decision uncertainty}$ relating to the robustness of generated plans.

To quantify each type of uncertainty, we propose methods tailored to the unique properties of perception and decision-making: we use conformal prediction to calibrate perception uncertainty and introduce Formal-Methods-Driven Prediction (FMDP) to quantify decision uncertainty, leveraging formal verification techniques for theoretical guarantees. Building on this quantification, we implement two targeted $\textit{intervention}$ mechanisms: an active sensing process that dynamically re-observes high-uncertainty scenes to enhance visual input quality and an automated refinement procedure that fine-tunes the model on high-certainty data, improving its capability to meet task specifications. Empirical validation in real-world and simulated robotic tasks demonstrates that our uncertainty disentanglement framework reduces variability by up to 40\% and enhances task success rates by 5\% compared to baselines. These improvements are attributed to the combined effect of both interventions and highlight the importance of uncertainty disentanglement, which facilitates targeted interventions that enhance the robustness and reliability of autonomous systems. Webpage, videos, demo, and code: https://uncertainty-in-planning.github.io.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly