Optimizing LLM Queries in Relational Data Analytics Workloads
Optimizing LLM Queries in Relational Data Analytics Workloads
Shu Liu, Asim Biswal, Amog Kamsetty, Audrey Cheng, Luis Gaspar Schroeder, Liana Patel, Shiyi Cao, Xiangxi Mo, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Matei Zaharia
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Batch data analytics is a growing application for Large Language Models (LLMs). LLMs enable users to perform a wide range of natural language tasks, such as classification, entity extraction, and translation, over large datasets. However, LLM inference is highly costly and slow: for example, an NVIDIA L4 GPU running Llama3-8B can only process 6 KB of text per second, taking about a month to handle 15 GB of data; processing a similar amount of data costs around $18K on OpenAI’s GPT-4o. In this paper, we propose novel techniques that can significantly reduce the cost of LLM calls for relational data analytics workloads. Our key contribution is developing efficient algorithms for reordering the rows and the fields within each row of an input table to maximize key-value (KV) cache reuse when performing LLM serving. As such, our approach can be easily applied to existing analytics systems and serving platforms. Our evaluation shows that our solution can yield up to 3.4× improvement in job completion time on a benchmark of diverse LLM-based queries using Llama 3 models. Our solution also achieves a 32% cost savings under OpenAI and Anthropic pricing models.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly