TurboAttention: Efficient attention approximation for high throughputs llm
TurboAttention: Efficient attention approximation for high throughputs llm
Hao Kang, Srikant Bharadwaj, James Hensman, Tushar Krishna, Victor Rühle, Saravan Rajmohan
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Large language model (LLM) inference demands significant amount of computation and memory, especially in the key attention mechanisms. While techniques, such as quantization, and acceleration algorithms, like FlashAttention, have improved efficiency of the overall inference, they address different aspects of the problem: quantization focuses on weight-activation operations, while FlashAttention improves execution but requires high-precision formats. Recent Key-value (KV) cache quantization reduces memory bandwidth but still needs floating-point dequantization for attention operations.
We present TurboAttention, a comprehensive approach to enable quantized execution of attention that simultaneously addresses both memory and computational efficiency. Our solution introduces two key innovations: FlashQ, a headwise attention quantization technique that enables both compression of KV cache and quantized execution of activation-activation multiplication, and Sparsity-based Softmax Approximation (SAS), which eliminates the need for dequantization to FP32 during exponentiation operation in attention. Experimental results demonstrate that TurboAttention achieves 1.2-1.8x speedup in attention, reduces the KV cache size by over 4.4x, and enables up to 2.37x maximum throughput over the FP16 baseline while outperforming state-of-the-art quantization and compression techniques across various datasets and models.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly