SOLA: Optimizing SLO Attainment for Large Language Model Serving with State-Aware Scheduling
SOLA: Optimizing SLO Attainment for Large Language Model Serving with State-Aware Scheduling
Ke Hong, Xiuhong Li, Lufang Chen, Qiuli Mao, Guohao Dai, Xuefei Ning, Shengen Yan, Yun Liang, Yu Wang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Serving large language models (LLMs) efficiently requires elaborate request scheduling to satisfy service-level objectives (SLOs).
In the context of LLM serving, SLOs include the constraints on Time-to-First-Token (TTFT) and Time-per-Output-Token (TPOT).
Existing serving systems apply a coarse-grained request scheduling that follows a fixed principle at different iterations during the serving procedure, leading to (1) a significant distribution bias between TTFT and TPOT and (2) a significant distribution variance among different requests as shown in Fig. 1(a), and hence causes disappointing SLO attainment.

We identify that fine-grained scheduling based on a formal description of the design space addresses the issues mentioned above.
To this end, we first formulate a scheduling design space with flexible control of the request execution order and the workload at each iteration. Based on that, we introduce a state-aware scheduling strategy, which enables the awareness of two kinds of states: the states from the single request perspective and the states from the systemic perspective, and further balances between TTFT and TPOT and balances among different requests to improve the SLO attainment, as shown in Fig. 2. We implement SOLA with the above insights. The evaluation shows that SOLA enhances the SLO attainment from 45.5\% to 99.4\%, thus serving more requests. Given SLO constraints, SOLA serves 1.04-1.27$\times$ more requests than the state-of-the-art systems on average.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly