ThunderServe: High-performance and Cost-efficient LLM Serving in Cloud Environments
ThunderServe: High-performance and Cost-efficient LLM Serving in Cloud Environments
YOUHE JIANG, Fangcheng Fu, Xiaozhe Yao, Taiyi Wang, Bin CUI, Ana Klimovic, Eiko Yoneki
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Recent developments in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their remarkable proficiency in a range of tasks. Compared to in-house homogeneous GPU clusters, deploying LLMs in cloud environments with diverse types of GPUs is crucial for addressing the GPU shortage problem and being more cost-effective. However, the diversity of network environments and various GPU types on the cloud bring difficulties to achieving high-performance serving. In this work, we propose ThunderServe, a high-performance and cost-efficient LLM serving system for heterogeneous cloud environments. We introduce a novel scheduling algorithm, which optimizes the deployment plan of LLM serving to accommodate the heterogeneous resource and network bandwidth conditions in cloud environments. Furthermore, we propose a lightweight re-scheduling mechanism, designed to adapt to fluctuating online conditions (e.g., node failures, workload shifts) without the need for costly restarts of ongoing services. Empirical results in both heterogeneous cloud and homogeneous in-house environments reveal that ThunderServe delivers up to a 2.1$\times$ and on average a $1.7\times$ increase in throughput and achieves up to a 2.5$\times$ and on average a $1.5\times$ reduction in latency deadlines compared with state-of-the-art systems given the same price budget, suggesting opting for cloud services provides a more cost-efficient solution.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly