FedProphet: Memory-Efficient Federated Adversarial Training via Robust and Consistent Cascade Learning
FedProphet: Memory-Efficient Federated Adversarial Training via Robust and Consistent Cascade Learning
Minxue Tang, Yitu Wang, Jingyang Zhang, Louis DiValentin, Aolin Ding, Amin Hass, Yiran Chen, Hai Helen Li
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Federated Adversarial Training (FAT) can supplement robustness against adversarial examples to Federated Learning (FL), promoting a meaningful step toward trustworthy AI. However, FAT requires large models to preserve high accuracy while achieving strong robustness, incurring high memory-swapping latency when training on memory-constrained edge devices. Existing memory-efficient FL methods suffer from poor accuracy and weak robustness due to inconsistent local and global models. In this paper, we propose FedProphet, a novel FAT framework that can achieve memory efficiency, robustness, and consistency simultaneously. FedProphet reduces the memory requirement in local training while guaranteeing adversarial robustness by adversarial cascade learning with strong convexity regularization, and we show that the strong robustness also implies low inconsistency in FedProphet. We also develop a training coordinator on the server of FL, with Adaptive Perturbation Adjustment for utility-robustness balance and Differentiated Module Assignment for objective inconsistency mitigation. FedProphet significantly outperforms other baselines under different experimental settings, maintaining the accuracy and robustness of end-to-end FAT with 80% memory reduction and up to 10.8x speedup in training time.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly