Balancing Pipeline Parallelism with Vocabulary Parallelism
Balancing Pipeline Parallelism with Vocabulary Parallelism
Yeung Man Tsung, Penghui Qi, Min Lin, Xinyi Wan
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Pipeline parallelism is widely used to scale the training of transformer-based large language models, various works have been done to improve its throughput and memory footprint. In this paper, we address a frequently overlooked issue: the vocabulary layers can cause imbalanced computation and memory usage across pipeline stages, worsening pipeline bubbles and the memory bottleneck. To tackle this, we partition the vocabulary layers evenly across pipeline devices and group the computation into pipeline passes. To reduce the activation memory overhead, we propose several algorithms to reduce communication barriers within vocabulary layers. Additionally, we utilize a generalizable method to integrate Vocabulary Parallelism with existing pipeline schedules. By combining these techniques, our methods effectively balance the computation and parameter memory, with only a small constant activation memory overhead. Notably, when combined with activation memory-balanced schedules like V-Half, our approach achieves perfect balance in both memory and computation. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our method achieves computation and memory balance regardless of the vocabulary size, resulting in a 5\% to 51\% improvement in throughput compared to naive approaches, meanwhile significantly reducing peak memory usage especially for large vocabulary scenarios.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly