MAS-ATTENTION: MEMORY-AWARE STREAM PROCESSING FOR ATTENTION ACCELERATION ON RESOURCE-CONSTRAINED EDGE DEVICES
MAS-ATTENTION: MEMORY-AWARE STREAM PROCESSING FOR ATTENTION ACCELERATION ON RESOURCE-CONSTRAINED EDGE DEVICES
Mohammadali Shakerdargah, Shan Lu, Chao Gao, Di Niu
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The advent of foundation models have revolutionized various fields, enabling unprecedented task accuracy and flexibility in computational linguistics, computer vision and other domains. Attention mechanism has become an essential component of foundation models, due to their superb capability of capturing correlations in a sequence. However, attention results in quadratic complexity in memory and compute as the context length grows. Although many fusion-based exact attention acceleration algorithms have been developed for datacenter-grade GPUs and accelerators leveraging multi-core parallelism and data locality, yet it remains a significant challenge to accelerate attention on resource-constrained edge neural accelerators with limited compute units and stringent on-chip caches. In this paper, we propose a scheme for exact attention inference acceleration on memory-constrained edge accelerators, by parallelizing the utilization of heterogeneous compute units, i.e., vector processing units and matrix processing units. Our method involves scheduling workloads onto these different compute units in a multi-tiered tiling scheme to process tiled vector workloads and matrix workloads in attention as two streams, respecting the workload dependencies. We search for tiling factors to maximize the parallelization of both compute units while considering I/O overhead, and propose a proactive cache overwrite strategy to avoid undesirable cache spills in reality. Extensive results based on open-sourced simulation frameworks show up to 2.75× speedup and 54% reduction in energy consumption as compared to the state-of-the-art attention fusion method (FLAT) in the edge computing scenario. Further experiments on a real-world edge neural processing unit demonstrate speedup of up to 1.76× for attention as compared to FLAT, without affecting model output accuracy.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly