Marconi: Prefix Caching for the Era of Hybrid LLMs
Marconi: Prefix Caching for the Era of Hybrid LLMs
Rui Pan, Zhuang Wang, Zhen Jia, Can Karakus, Luca Zancato, Tri Dao, Yida Wang, Ravi Netravali
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Hybrid models that combine the capabilities of Attention layers with the efficiency of recurrent layers (e.g., State Space Models) have gained traction in practically supporting long contexts in Large Language Model serving. Yet, the unique properties of these models complicate the usage of complementary efficiency optimizations such as prefix caching that skip redundant computations across requests. Most notably, their use of in-place state updates for recurrent layers precludes rolling back cache entries for partial sequence overlaps, and instead mandates only exact-match cache hits; the effect is a deluge of (large) cache entries per sequence, most of which yield minimal reuse opportunities. We present Marconi, the first system that supports efficient prefix caching with Hybrid LLMs. Key to Marconi are its novel admission and eviction policies that more judiciously assess potential cache entries based not only on recency, but also on (1) forecasts of their reuse likelihood across a taxonomy of different hit scenarios, and (2) the compute savings that hits deliver relative to memory footprints. Across diverse workloads and Hybrid models, Marconi achieves up to 34.4$\times$ higher token hit rates (71.1\% or 617 ms lower TTFT) compared to state-of-the-art prefix caching systems.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly