Youmu: Efficient Columnar Data Pipeline for LLM Training
Youmu: Efficient Columnar Data Pipeline for LLM Training
Tianle Zhong, Jiechen Zhao, Qiang Su, Geoffrey Fox
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) training is extremely data-intensive, often involving over trillion-level tokens. 
Although LLM datasets are usually ingested and stored in columnar formats, they often need to be converted into another format for training, which incurs significant storage and maintenance costs due to extra data copies. 
While eliminating the conversion would save tens of terabytes of space in costly high performance storage, this work identifies challenges that drive us to re-think the entire data pipeline. 
Without conversion, we find that fine-grained random access patterns incur hundreds of times efficiency drops.
Specifically, the existing data pipelines have two fundamental drawbacks: 
(1) They cannot efficiently support directly digesting data in columnar format due to default coarse-grained I/O; 
(2) Solutions to the first drawback sacrifice memory footprint to cache datasets. 
In this paper, we present Youmu, a new data pipeline that directly feeds fine-grained columnar data into GPUs, enabling cost-efficient LLM training. 
Meanwhile, Youmu maintains high training accuracy, whose perplexity outperforms widely adopted local shuffle by reducing 0.3-0.7 for pretraining. 
Compared to performance-optimal state-of-the-art, distributed memory-based pipelines, Youmu achieves comparable throughput with $\sim$80\% less memory footprint.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly