Graph Learning at Scale: Characterizing and Optimizing Pre-Propagation GNNs
Graph Learning at Scale: Characterizing and Optimizing Pre-Propagation GNNs
Zichao Yue, Chenhui Deng, Zhiru Zhang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are widely used for learning node embeddings in graphs, typically adopting a message-passing scheme. This approach, however, leads to the neighbor explosion problem, with exponentially growing computational and memory demands as layers increase. Graph sampling has become the predominant method for scaling GNNs to large graphs, mitigating but not fully solving the issue.
Pre-propagation GNNs (PP-GNNs) represent a new class of models that decouple feature propagation from training through pre-processing, addressing neighbor explosion in theory. Yet, their practical advantages and system-level optimizations remain underexplored.
This paper provides a comprehensive characterization of PP-GNNs, comparing them with graph-sampling-based methods in training efficiency, scalability, and accuracy. While PP-GNNs achieve comparable accuracy, we identify data loading as the key bottleneck for training efficiency and input expansion as a major scalability challenge. To address these issues, we propose optimized data loading schemes and tailored training methods that improve PP-GNN training throughput by an average of 15$\times$ over the PP-GNN baselines, with speedup of up to 2 orders of magnitude compared to sampling-based GNNs on large graph benchmarks. Our implementation is publicly available at https://github.com/cornell-zhang/preprop-gnn.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly