VoLUT: Efficient Volumetric streaming enhanced by LUT-based super-resolution
VoLUT: Efficient Volumetric streaming enhanced by LUT-based super-resolution
Chendong Wang, Anlan Zhang, Yifan Yang, Lili Qiu, Yuqing Yang, XINYANG JIANG, Feng Qian, Suman Banerjee
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
3D volumetric video provides immersive experience and is gaining traction in digital media. Despite its rising popularity, the streaming of volumetric video content poses significant challenges due to the high data bandwidth requirement. A natural approach  to mitigate the bandwidth issue is to reduce the volumetric video's data rate by downsampling the content prior to transmission. The video can then be upsampled at the receiver's end using a super-resolution (SR) algorithm to reconstruct the high-resolution details. While super-resolution techniques have been extensively explored and advanced for 2D video content, there is limited work on SR algorithms tailored for volumetric videos. 

To address this gap and the growing need for efficient volumetric video streaming, we have developed VoLUT with a new SR algorithm specifically designed for volumetric content. Our algorithm uniquely harnesses the power of lookup tables (LUTs) to facilitate the efficient and accurate upscaling of low-resolution volumetric data. The use of LUTs enables our algorithm to quickly reference precomputed high-resolution values, thereby significantly reducing the computational complexity and time required for upscaling. We further apply adaptive video bit rate algorithm (ABR) to dynamically determine the downsampling rate according to the network condition and stream the selected video rate to the receiver. Compared to related work, VoLUT is the first to enable high-quality 3D SR on commodity mobile devices at line-rate. Our evaluation shows VoLUT  can reduce bandwidth usage by  70\% , boost QoE by 36.7\% for volumetric video streaming and achieve $8.4\times$ 3D SR speed-up with no quality compromise.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly