LServe: Efficient Long-sequence LLM Serving with Unified Sparse Attention
LServe: Efficient Long-sequence LLM Serving with Unified Sparse Attention
Shang Yang, Junxian Guo, Haotian Tang, Qinghao Hu, Guangxuan Xiao, Jiaming Tang, Yujun Lin, Zhijian Liu, Yao Lu, Song Han
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable potential in processing long sequences, yet efficiently serving these long-context models remains challenging due to the quadratic computational complexity of attention in the prefilling stage and the large memory footprint of the KV cache in the decoding stage. To address these issues, we introduce LServe, an efficient system that accelerates long-sequence LLM serving via unified sparse attention. This method unifies different hardware-friendly, structured sparsity patterns for both prefilling and decoding attention into a single framework, where computations on less important tokens are skipped block-wise. LServe demonstrates the compatibility of static and dynamic sparsity in long-context LLM attention. This design enables multiplicative speedups by combining these optimizations. Specifically, we convert half of the attention heads to nearly free streaming heads in both the prefilling and decoding stages. Additionally, we find that only a constant number of KV pages is required to preserve long-context capabilities, irrespective of context length. We then design a hierarchical KV page selection policy that dynamically prunes KV pages based on query-centric similarity. For Llama-3-8B, LServe accelerates LLM prefilling by an average of 2.4x and decoding by up to 3.3x over TensorRT-LLM, maintaining long-context accuracy. The code will be released upon publication.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly