PipeFill: Using GPUs During Bubbles in Pipeline-parallel LLM Training
PipeFill: Using GPUs During Bubbles in Pipeline-parallel LLM Training
Daiyaan Arfeen, Zhen Zhang, Xinwei Fu, Gregory Ganger, Yida Wang
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) with billions of parameters generally involves pipeline-parallel (PP) execution. Unfortunately, PP model training can use GPUs inefficiently, especially at large scale, due to idle GPU time caused by pipeline bubbles, which are often 15-30% and can exceed 60% of the training job's GPU allocation. To improve the GPU utilization of PP model training, this paper describes PipeFill, which fills pipeline bubbles with execution of other pending jobs. By leveraging bubble GPU time, PipeFill reduces the GPU utilization sacrifice associated with scaling-up of large-model training. To context-switch between fill jobs and the main training job with minimal overhead to the main job, and maximize fill job efficiency, PipeFill carefully fits fill job work to measured bubble durations and GPU memory availability, introduces explicit pipeline-bubble instructions, and orchestrates placement and execution of fill jobs in pipeline bubbles. Experiments show that PipeFill can increase overall utilization by up to 63% for GPUs used in large-scale LLM training, with <2% slowdown of the training job, and 5-15% even for low-scale LLM training. For large-scale LLM training on 8K GPUs, the 63% increase translates to up to 2.6K additional GPUs worth of work completed.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly