Efficient On-Device Machine Learning with a Biologically-Plausible Forward-Only Algorithm
Efficient On-Device Machine Learning with a Biologically-Plausible Forward-Only Algorithm
Baichuan Huang, Amir Aminifar
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
The training of the state-of-the-art Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) consumes massive amounts of energy, while the human brain learns new tasks with remarkable efficiency. Currently, the training of DNNs relies almost exclusively on Backpropagation (BP). However, BP faces criticism due to its biologically implausible nature, underscoring the significant disparity in performance and energy efficiency between DNNs and the human brain. Forward-only algorithms are proposed to be the biologically plausible alternatives to BP, to better mimic the learning process of the human brain and enhance energy efficiency. In this paper, we propose a biologically-plausible forward-only algorithm (Bio-FO), not only targeting the biological-implausibility issues associated with BP, but also outperforming the state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms. We extensively evaluate our proposed Bio-FO against other forward-only algorithms and demonstrate its performance across diverse datasets, including two real-world medical applications on wearable devices with limited resources and relatively large-scale datasets such as mini-ImageNet. At the same time, we implement our proposed on-device learning algorithm on the NVIDIA Jetson Nano and demonstrate its efficiency compared to other state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms. The code is available at https://github.com/whubaichuan/Bio-FO.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly