XGrammar: Flexible and Efficient Structured Generation Engine for Large Language Models
XGrammar: Flexible and Efficient Structured Generation Engine for Large Language Models
Yixin Dong, Charlie F. Ruan, Yaxing Cai, Ziyi Xu, Yilong Zhao, Ruihang Lai, Tianqi Chen
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
The applications of LLM Agents are becoming increasingly complex and diverse, leading to a high demand for structured outputs that can be parsed into code, structured function calls, and embodied agent commands.These developments bring significant demands for structured generation in LLM inference. Context-free grammar is a flexible approach to enable structured generation via constrained decoding. However, executing context-free grammar requires going through several stack states over all tokens in vocabulary during runtime, bringing non-negligible overhead for structured generation. In this paper, we propose XGrammar, a flexible and efficient structure generation engine for large language models. XGrammar accelerates context-free grammar execution by dividing the vocabulary into context-independent tokens that can be prechecked and context-dependent tokens that need to be interpreted during runtime. We further build transformations to expand the grammar context and reduce the number of context-independent tokens. Additionally, we build an efficient persistent stack to accelerate the context-dependent token checks. Finally, we co-design the grammar engine with LLM inference engine to overlap grammar computation with GPU executions. Evaluation results show that XGrammar can more than 10x faster than existing solutions for structure generation. Combined with a LLM inference engine, it can generate near-zero overhead structure generation in low-latency inference scenarios on H100 GPU.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly