LAVA: Lifetime-Aware VM Allocation with Learned Distributions and Adaptation to Mispredictions
LAVA: Lifetime-Aware VM Allocation with Learned Distributions and Adaptation to Mispredictions
Jianheng Ling, Pratik Worah, Yawen Wang, Yunchuan Kong, Chunlei Wang, Clifford Stein, Diwakar Gupta, Jason Behmer, Logan A. Bush, Prakash Ramanan, Rajesh Kumar, Thomas Chestna, Yajing Liu, YING LIU, Ye Zhao, Kathryn S. McKinley, Meeyoung Park, Martin Maas
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Scheduling virtual machines (VMs) on hosts in cloud data centers dictates efficiency and is an NP-hard problem with incomplete information.  Prior work improved VM scheduling with predicted VM lifetimes.  Our work further improves lifetime-aware scheduling using repredictions with lifetime distributions versus one-shot prediction. Our approach repredicts and adjusts VM and host lifetimes when incorrect predictions emerge. We also present novel approaches for defragmentation and regular system maintenance, which are essential to our data center reliability and optimizations, and are not explored in prior work. We show repredictions deliver a fundamental advance in effectiveness over one-shot prediction.
We call our novel combination of distribution-based lifetime predictions and scheduling algorithms Lifetime Aware VM Allocation (LAVA). LAVA reduces resource stranding and increases the number of empty hosts, which are critical for large VM scheduling, cloud system updates, and reducing dynamic energy consumption. Our approach runs in production within Google's hyperscale cloud data centers, where it improves efficiency by decreasing stranded compute and memory resources by ~3% and ~2% respectively. It increases empty hosts by 2.3-9.2 pp in production, reducing dynamic energy consumption, and increasing availability for large VMs and cloud system updates. We also show a reduction in VM migrations for host defragmentation and maintenance.  In addition to our fleet-wide production deployment, we perform simulation studies to characterize the design space and show that our algorithm significantly outperforms the prior state of the art lifetime-based scheduling approach.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly