ScaleFusion: Scalable Inference of Spatial-Temporal Diffusion Transformers for High-Resolution Long Video Generation
ScaleFusion: Scalable Inference of Spatial-Temporal Diffusion Transformers for High-Resolution Long Video Generation
Jiacheng Yang, Jun Wu, Zhen Zhang, Xinwei Fu, Zhiying Xu, Zhen Jia, Yida Wang, Gennady Pekhimenko
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7  (MLSys 2025)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Recent advancements in training diffusion models have made generating high-quality videos possible. Particularly, the spatial-temporal diffusion transformers (ST-DiTs) emerge as a promising diffusion model architecture for generating videos of high-resolution (1080p) and long duration (20 seconds). However, the quadratic scaling of compute cost with respect to resolution and duration, primarily due to spatial-temporal attention layers processing longer sequences, results in high inference latency of ST-DiTs. 
This hinders their applicability in time-sensitive scenarios. 
Existing sequence parallelism techniques, such as DeepSpeed-Ulysses and RingAttention, are not optimally scalable for ST-DiT inference across multiple GPU machines due to cross-machine communication overheads. To address this challenge, we introduce ScaleFusion, a scalable inference engine designed to optimize ST-DiT inference for high-resolution, long video generation. 
By leveraging the inherent structure of spatial-temporal attention layers, ScaleFusion effectively hides cross-machine communication overhead through novel intra-layer and inter-layer communication scheduling algorithms. This enables strong scaling of 3.60$\times$ on 4 Amazon EC2 p4d.24xlarge machines (32 A100 GPUs) against 1 machine (8 A100 GPUs). 
Our experiments demonstrate that ScaleFusion surpasses state-of-the-art techniques, achieving an average speedup of 1.36$\times$ (up to 1.58$\times$).
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly