GraphPipe: Improving Performance and Scalability of
DNN Training with Graph Pipeline Parallelism
Byungsoo Jeon∗
byungsoj.com@gmail.com
NVIDIA
Arlington, Virginia, USA
Mengdi Wu∗
mengdiwu@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Shiyi Cao∗
shicao@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
Sunghyun Kim∗
sunghyun@csail.mit.edu
MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
Sunghyun Park
sunghyunp@nvidia.com
NVIDIA
Seattle, Washington, USA
Neeraj Aggarwal
aggarwal.neeraj141@gmail.com
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Colin Unger
unger@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA, USA
Daiyaan Arfeen
marfeen@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Peiyuan Liao
peiyuanl@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Xupeng Miao
xupeng@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Mohammad Alizadeh
alizadeh@csail.mit.edu
MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
Gregory R. Ganger
ganger@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Tianqi Chen
tqchen@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Zhihao Jia
zhihao@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon Univerisity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) continue to grow rapidly
in size, making them infeasible to train on a single device.
Pipeline parallelism is commonly used in existing DNN sys-
tems to support large-scale DNN training by partitioning a
DNN into multiple stages, which concurrently perform DNN
training for different micro-batches in a pipeline fashion.
However, existing pipeline-parallel approaches only consider
sequential pipeline stages and thus ignore the topology of a
DNN, resulting in missed model-parallel opportunities.
This paper presents graph pipeline parallelism (GPP), a
new pipeline-parallel scheme that partitions a DNN into
pipeline stages whose dependencies are identified by a di-
rected acyclic graph. GPP generalizes existing sequential
pipeline parallelism and preserves the inherent topology of a
DNN to enable concurrent execution of computationally-
independent operators, resulting in reduced memory re-
quirement and improved GPU performance. In addition, we
develop GraphPipe, a distributed system that exploits GPP
strategies to enable performant and scalable DNN training.
GraphPipe partitions a DNN into a graph of stages, opti-
mizes micro-batch schedules for these stages, and parallelizes
∗Equal contribution.
DNN training using the discovered GPP strategies. Evalu-
ation on a variety of DNNs shows that GraphPipe outper-
forms existing pipeline-parallel systems such as PipeDream
and Piper by up to 1.6×. GraphPipe also reduces the search
time by 9-21× compared to PipeDream and Piper.
1 Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) grow more rapidly in size
against hardware developments, making them computation-
ally costly to train [2, 30]. A recent language model GPT-4
[28] supposedly uses a much larger number of parameters
[10] compared to the previous model GPT-3 with 175 billion
parameters [6]. As a result, training modern DNNs requires
distributing the model architecture across multiple devices.
To address this challenge, existing DNN systems apply
model parallelism [7, 18, 26, 35, 36, 48] where a DNN is
partitioned into smaller pieces, each of which fits into the
memory of a single device. Pipeline parallelism [8, 11, 24,
25, 40] is a particular form of model parallelism that further
improves device utilization and throughput. As shown in
Figure 1, a key idea of pipeline parallelism is to split both a
DNN and a mini-batch of samples into smaller pieces. First,
the DNN is partitioned into multiple disjoint stages, each
of which is a sub-model and links to other stages to form a
pipeline. Second, a mini-batch of samples is further divided
1
arXiv:2406.17145v2
[cs.DC]
28
Oct
2024
