arXiv:2311.02206v5 [cs.DB] 19 Nov 2024

Optimizing Datalog for the GPU
Yihao Sun

Ahmedur Rahman Shovon

Thomas Gilray

ysun67@syr.edu
Syracuse University
Syracuse, New York, USA

ashov@uic.edu
University of Illinois, Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA

thomas.gilray@wsu.edu
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington, USA

Sidharth Kumar

Kristopher Micinski

sidharth@uic.edu
University of Illinois, Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA

kkmicins@syr.edu
Syracuse University
Syracuse, New York, USA

Abstract

The second rule requires recursive computation to a fixedpoint: the engine iteratively discovers an ever-larger intensional database (Reach), starting from the extensional database (Edge). Unfortunately, best-in-class in-memory Datalogs hit scalability walls around 8–16 threads due to the
challenges of working with locking, linked data structures
in a parallel, shared-memory setting. For example, as we
will soon see, when run at 32 threads on transitive closure,
Soufflé [21] (a state-of-the-art CPU-based engine) spends
77.8% of its time in serialized tuple deduplication/insertion.
Compared to CPUs, GPUs offer hundreds of thousands
of threads, along with extremely high memory throughput
via HBM [20]. However, achieving optimal performance necessitates embracing the GPU’s programming model. Traditionally, CPU-based graphics processing code has been
accelerated via SIMD instructions (such as AVX and SSE), necessitating that all threads operate in lockstep and strongly
penalizing thread divergence. While GPUs are inspired by
this SIMD paradigm, modern GPGPU programming is SIMT
in nature, allowing parallel execution at a per-thread granularity. Threads can diverge at the sub-warp level using
advanced thread scheduling techniques [36]. As we will see,
the SIMT nature of modern GPUs is a natural fit for Datalog, which stresses both massive data parallelism (e.g., large
joins), and task parallelism (e.g., multiple rules).
In this paper, we introduce GPUlog: a GPU-based library
for parallel relational algebra kernels, enabling the execution
of Datalog programs on modern GPUs. GPUlog is backed by
a novel SIMT data structure: the hash-indexed sorted array
(HISA). We designed HISA to balance the concerns of modern
Datalog on the GPU, enabling three critical tasks: (1) efficient
range queries, necessary for joins, (2) lock-free deduplication,
and (3) parallel iteration. Additionally, GPUlog provides
abstractions for optimized evaluation of 𝑛-way loop-joins
we call temporarily-materialized joins, offering a space-fortime trade-off we found crucial to scale to high data loads.
We have used GPUlog to implement and comprehensively
study the performance of graph analytics (reachability, same
generation) and program analysis (points-to analysis), evaluating GPUlog against cuDF, GPUJoin, and Soufflé [21, 39, 48].
We observe improved (5×) join performance compared to

Modern Datalog engines (e.g., LogicBlox, Soufflé, ddlog) enable their users to write declarative queries which compute
recursive deductions over extensional facts, leaving highperformance operationalization (query planning, semi-naïve
evaluation, and parallelization) to the engine. Such engines
form the backbone of modern high-throughput applications
in static analysis, network monitoring, and social-media
mining. In this paper, we present a methodology for implementing a modern in-memory Datalog engine on data
center GPUs, allowing us to achieve significant (up to 45×)
gains compared to Soufflé (a modern CPU-based engine) on
context-sensitive points-to analysis of httpd. We present
GPUlog, a Datalog engine backend that implements iterated
relational algebra kernels over a novel range-indexed data
structure we call the hash-indexed sorted array (HISA). HISA
combines the algorithmic benefits of incremental rangeindexed relations with the raw computation throughput of
operations over dense data structures. Our experiments show
that GPUlog is significantly faster than CPU-based Datalog engines while achieving a favorable memory footprint
compared to contemporary GPU-based joins.

1

Introduction

Declarative languages enable their users to write high-level
logical rules that specify acceptable solutions to a problem, leaving efficient implementation to a high-performance
backend. In particular, modern CPU-based Datalog engines
power state-of-the-art systems in program analysis [5, 6,
12, 13], social-media mining [18, 44, 45, 49], and business
analytics [40]. Such engines enable a user to specify deductions (forming an intensional database, henceforth IDB)
over extensionally manifest relations (the extensional database, henceforth EDB). For example, given an input relation
Edge(from,to), the program REACH computes Edge’s transitive closure:
Reach(from, to) ← Edge(from, to).
Reach(from, to) ← Edge(from, mid), Reach(mid, to).
1

