MaxEmbed: Maximizing SSD bandwidth utilization for
huge embedding models serving
Ruwen Fan

Minhui Xie*

Haodi Jiang

Youyou Lu*

{frw23,xmh19,jhd20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,luyouyou@tsinghua.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Deep learning recommendation models (DLRMs) have gained
widespread application across search, advertising, and ecommerce. Still, DLRMs present notable challenges as they
depend heavily on large embedding tables to represent sparse
features in recommendation systems. This raises concerns
about both memory capacity and cost. Solid-state drives
(SSDs) offer a cost-effective solution with a significantly
larger capacity, but they introduce read amplification issues
because of the mismatch between embedding size and SSD
read granularity. Prior SSD embedding storage systems aim
to tackle these challenges by employing hypergraph partitioning to co-locate co-appearing embeddings onto the
same SSD page, alleviating read amplification. However, this
approach has a drawback as it divides embeddings into completely disjoint clusters, limiting potential combinations between embeddings.
In response to this limitation, we introduce MaxEmbed.
Capitalizing on the extensive storage capacity of SSDs, MaxEmbed effectively mines relationships between storage combinations of embeddings with replication, thereby enhancing
the effective bandwidth of SSDs. Additionally, MaxEmbed
incorporates a corresponding online service module for embedding query request handling, leveraging two key optimizations to reduce the overhead brought by replication.
Our evaluations demonstrate that MaxEmbed boosts SSD
embedding serving throughput by up to 18.7% under various
settings.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Information storage systems.
Keywords: Embedding models, SSD, Data placement, Data
replication
∗ Minhui Xie and Youyou Lu are the corresponding authors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674172

ACM Reference Format:
Ruwen Fan, Minhui Xie, Haodi Jiang and Youyou Lu. 2024. MaxEmbed: Maximizing SSD bandwidth utilization for huge embedding
models serving. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3622781.3674172

1

Introduction

Deep learning recommendation models (DLRMs) [29] find
extensive applications in various domains, including search,
advertising, and e-commerce [16, 42, 45]. DLRMs depend
heavily on large embedding parameters to capture unique object characteristics. However, the rapid expansion in model
size — growing tenfold annually — contrasts starkly with the
slower growth of memory capacity [14, 15, 26, 39]. In this
context, solid-state drives (SSDs) offer a cost-effective solution with superior storage capacity compared to traditional
memory, making them increasingly vital for storing DLRM
embeddings [21, 35, 37, 38, 41].
However, utilizing SSDs for storing model parameters
introduces a notable challenge. SSDs have a fixed page granularity, typically 4KB, while embedding parameters are much
smaller, ranging from 64 to 512 bytes [28, 30]. When reading
an embedding, the whole 4KB page needs to be read from
SSD, which causes read amplification in SSDs. It restrains
the effective bandwidth and thus degrades the whole system
throughput.
To mitigate read amplification, a prior study tries to colocate those embeddings that commonly appear together on
one SSD page [11], thus serving more embeddings per SSD
page read. It employs hypergraph partitioning to identify
commonly co-occurring embeddings to guide the embedding
placement. Although it alleviates the phenomenon of reading
amplification, the effective bandwidth of SSD is still very
limited, only about 8.58% in our evaluation.
With deep analysis, we find that the number of naturally
co-appearing embeddings often surpasses an SSD page’s storage capacity. This intrinsically prohibits the aggregation of
these embeddings. Some of those embeddings are destined to
be scattered into different SSD pages if there is only one copy
of each embedding, which will continue to constrain SSD
bandwidth utilization. This indicates that simply rearranging
the embedding placement is not enough.

