Simplifying and Accelerating NOR Flash I/O Stack for
RAM-Restricted Microcontrollers
Host

Abstract
NOR flash has been increasingly popular for RAM-restricted
microcontrollers due to its small package, high reliability, etc.
To satisfy RAM restrictions, existing NOR flash file systems
migrate their functionalities, i.e., block-level data organization and wear leveling (WL), from RAM to NOR flash. However, such fine-grained block-level management introduces
frequent index updates and NOR flash scanning, leading to
severe I/O amplification, which further deteriorates as they
are decoupled in existing NOR flash file systems.
To address the problem, we propose NF2FS, a NOR flashfriendly file system. Our key insight is that applications running on NOR flash usually have (1) small file sizes, therefore
block-based data organization can be converted to flat file layout (for fast file/dir scanning); (2) deterministic I/O patterns,
thereby WL can be achieved through coarse file swapping.
As a result, NF2FS relaxes data organization and WL to a
coarse-grained file level, which are then cooperated within
the file system. We implement NF2FS in FreeRTOS using a
range of techniques, including the all-logging layout, along
with efficient layout management approaches such as dual
bitmap space allocator and soft-update-like crash consistency.
Experiments suggest that NF2FS significantly outperforms
existing works and can prevent quick NOR flash wear-out.

1

Fine-Grained
Management

File System
Block Layer

File System

Storage

Soft Controller
Hardware
Controller
Stored Data

Coarse-Grained
Management

File System
WL Layer

Stored Data

Stored Data

File System
WL

Stored Data

Simpler devices from server to microcontroller with less RAM
(a) SSD, UFS
I/O Stack

(b) Raw-NAND
I/O Stack

(c) Existing NOR (d) Our Simplified
I/O Stack
I/O Stack

Figure 1. File Systems in Flash-based I/O Stacks. Generally, file systems use indexes to organize data, while hardware
controllers perform WL. Without hardware controllers, NAND
file systems perform data organization and WL in host RAM. In
contrast, NOR file systems incorporate the two functionalities
into storage due to RAM limits.
to balance device wear [3]. However, the two layers both
deploy complex data structures (e.g., B-tree) in host RAM,
contradicting NOR flash’s RAM restriction.
To address the problems, existing NOR flash file systems
migrate their functionalities from host RAM to storage (by
maintaining all data structures in NOR flash while leveraging
a small portion of host RAMs for I/O), as shown in Figure 1(c).
To accommodate in-place updating data structures in the file
system and WL layer1 , they either arrange updates in an outof-place manner or store WL metadata across blocks (i.e., a
decentralized approach). For example, LittleFS [17] leverages
copy-on-write (CoW) to update indexes, while SPIFFS [16]
distributes program/erase (P/E) information to each block.
Nevertheless, these approaches introduce severe I/O amplification, reducing both performance and lifespan. Specifically,
(1) updating indexes leads to cascade pointer updating; (2)
decentralizing P/E information forces block selection to scan
all NOR flash blocks. Our experiment suggests that in writeintensive real-world workloads, LittleFS [17] and SPIFFS [16]
spend up to 28.43× and 4.51× time compared to the native
file system that directly operates raw NOR flash.
We observe that the key problems of existing NOR flash
file systems lie in two aspects: (1) they manage NOR in a finegrained block level even on the RAM-restricted platforms,
causing I/O amplification; (2) they seperate WL functionality
from the file system design, with both fine-grained blocklevel management, further deteriorating I/O amplification.

Introduction

With the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), the demand for NOR flash has increased dramatically [8, 9, 29].
Compared to traditional storage devices (e.g., NAND flash),
NOR flash is small (MB level), byte-addressable, and deployed
with RAM-restricted microcontroller units (MCU). Similar to
NAND flash, NOR flash faces the erase-before-write problem.
Consequently, these characteristics emphasize two primary
goals for building a NOR flash file system: (1) to minimize
RAM usage and (2) to prolong NOR flash lifespans.
Unfortunately, the widely used block-based file systems
that serve for SSD or UFS [22] are unsuitable for NOR flash.
The reason is that they rely on the hardware controller (e.g.,
FTL for WL and L2P mapping [21]) to provide a unified
disk-like interface, as shown in Figure 1(a), while NOR flash
has neither controller nor integrated RAM due to its low
cost and density. Meanwhile, raw-NAND file systems, which
aim to manage NAND flash without a controller, still fail to
suit NOR flash. As shown in Figure 1(b), they aim to emulate hardware controllers using software (i.e., soft controller).
Specifically, they build upon a multi-layer I/O stack with
separated functionalities: the file system leverages block indexes to organize data, while the soft controller provides WL

1 WL layer and soft controller are interchangeable for NOR flash file systems

as the soft controller in NOR flash file systems only has WL functionality.

1

