Simplifying and Accelerating NOR Flash I/O Stack for
RAM-Restricted Microcontrollers
Abstract
NOR flash has been increasingly popular for RAM-restricted
microcontrollers due to its small package, high reliability, etc.
To satisfy RAM restrictions, existing NOR flash file systems
migrate their functionalities, i.e., block-level data organiza-
tion and wear leveling (WL), from RAM to NOR flash. How-
ever, such fine-grained block-level management introduces
frequent index updates and NOR flash scanning, leading to
severe I/O amplification, which further deteriorates as they
are decoupled in existing NOR flash file systems.
To address the problem, we propose NF2FS, a NOR flash-
friendly file system. Our key insight is that applications run-
ning on NOR flash usually have (1) small file sizes, therefore
block-based data organization can be converted to flat file lay-
out (for fast file/dir scanning); (2) deterministic I/O patterns,
thereby WL can be achieved through coarse file swapping.
As a result, NF2FS relaxes data organization and WL to a
coarse-grained file level, which are then cooperated within
the file system. We implement NF2FS in FreeRTOS using a
range of techniques, including the all-logging layout, along
with efficient layout management approaches such as dual
bitmap space allocator and soft-update-like crash consistency.
Experiments suggest that NF2FS significantly outperforms
existing works and can prevent quick NOR flash wear-out.
1 Introduction
With the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), the de-
mand for NOR flash has increased dramatically [8, 9, 29].
Compared to traditional storage devices (e.g., NAND flash),
NOR flash is small (MB level), byte-addressable, and deployed
with RAM-restricted microcontroller units (MCU). Similar to
NAND flash, NOR flash faces the erase-before-write problem.
Consequently, these characteristics emphasize two primary
goals for building a NOR flash file system: (1) to minimize
RAM usage and (2) to prolong NOR flash lifespans.
Unfortunately, the widely used block-based file systems
that serve for SSD or UFS [22] are unsuitable for NOR flash.
The reason is that they rely on the hardware controller (e.g.,
FTL for WL and L2P mapping [21]) to provide a unified
disk-like interface, as shown in Figure 1(a), while NOR flash
has neither controller nor integrated RAM due to its low
cost and density. Meanwhile, raw-NAND file systems, which
aim to manage NAND flash without a controller, still fail to
suit NOR flash. As shown in Figure 1(b), they aim to emu-
late hardware controllers using software (i.e., soft controller).
Specifically, they build upon a multi-layer I/O stack with
separated functionalities: the file system leverages block in-
dexes to organize data, while the soft controller provides WL
File System
Block Layer
Hardware
Controller
Stored Data
(a) SSD, UFS
I/O Stack
Storage
Host
Stored Data
(b) Raw-NAND
I/O Stack
Stored Data
WL Layer
File System
(c) Existing NOR
I/O Stack
(d) Our Simplified
I/O Stack
Stored Data
File System
Soft Controller
Fine-Grained
Management
Coarse-Grained
Management
Simpler devices from server to microcontroller with less RAM
WL
File System
Figure 1. File Systems in Flash-based I/O Stacks. Gener-
ally, file systems use indexes to organize data, while hardware
controllers perform WL. Without hardware controllers, NAND
file systems perform data organization and WL in host RAM. In
contrast, NOR file systems incorporate the two functionalities
into storage due to RAM limits.
to balance device wear [3]. However, the two layers both
deploy complex data structures (e.g., B-tree) in host RAM,
contradicting NOR flash’s RAM restriction.
To address the problems, existing NOR flash file systems
migrate their functionalities from host RAM to storage (by
maintaining all data structures in NOR flash while leveraging
a small portion of host RAMs for I/O), as shown in Figure 1(c).
To accommodate in-place updating data structures in the file
system and WL layer1, they either arrange updates in an out-
of-place manner or store WL metadata across blocks (i.e., a
decentralized approach). For example, LittleFS [17] leverages
copy-on-write (CoW) to update indexes, while SPIFFS [16]
distributes program/erase (P/E) information to each block.
Nevertheless, these approaches introduce severe I/O amplifi-
cation, reducing both performance and lifespan. Specifically,
(1) updating indexes leads to cascade pointer updating; (2)
decentralizing P/E information forces block selection to scan
all NOR flash blocks. Our experiment suggests that in write-
intensive real-world workloads, LittleFS [17] and SPIFFS [16]
spend up to 28.43× and 4.51× time compared to the native
file system that directly operates raw NOR flash.
We observe that the key problems of existing NOR flash
file systems lie in two aspects: (1) they manage NOR in a fine-
grained block level even on the RAM-restricted platforms,
causing I/O amplification; (2) they seperate WL functionality
from the file system design, with both fine-grained block-
level management, further deteriorating I/O amplification.
1WL layer and soft controller are interchangeable for NOR flash file systems
as the soft controller in NOR flash file systems only has WL functionality.
1
