Dissecting and Modeling the Architecture of
Modern GPU Cores
Rodrigo Huerta
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
José-Lorenzo Cruz
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Antonio González
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
GPUs are the most popular platform for accelerating HPC work-
loads, such as artificial intelligence and science simulations. How-
ever, most microarchitectural research in academia relies on simu-
lators that model GPU core architectures based on designs that are
more than 15 years old, and differ significantly from modern core
architectures.
This work reverse engineers the architecture of modern NVIDIA
GPU cores, unveiling key aspects of its design and the important
role of the compiler in some of its main components. In particular,
it reveals how the issue logic works, the structure of the register
file and its associated cache, multiple features of the instruction
and data memory pipelines.
When modeling all these discovered microarchitectural details in
a state-of-the-art simulation framework, we show that its accuracy
is significantly improved, achieving a 20.58% reduction in mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) on average, which results in a
13.45% MAPE on average with respect to real modern hardware.
In addition, we show that the software-based dependence man-
agement mechanism included in modern NVIDIA GPUs outper-
forms a hardware mechanism based on scoreboards in terms of
performance and area.
CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Single instruction, mul-
tiple data; Multicore architectures; • Computing methodolo-
gies → Modeling methodologies; Model verification and vali-
dation; Simulation evaluation; Simulation tools.
Keywords
GPGPU, GPU Core, GPU Microarchitecture, Modeling, Simulation,
Validation, Scheduling, Reverse engineering, NVIDIA, Turing, Am-
pere, Blackwell
1 Introduction
In recent years, GPUs have become very popular for executing
general-purpose workloads [22] in addition to graphics. GPUs’ ar-
chitecture provides massive parallelism that can be leveraged by
many modern applications such as bioinformatics [24, 65], physics [56,
96], and chemistry [41, 98], to name a few. Nowadays, GPUs are
the main candidates to accelerate modern machine learning work-
loads, which have high memory bandwidth and computation de-
mands [28]. Over the last years, there have been significant innova-
tions in GPUs’ microarchitecture, their interconnection technolo-
gies (NVLink [68]), and their communication frameworks (NCCL [69]).
All these advances have enabled inference and training of Large
Language Models, which require clusters with many GPUs [62].
GPUs are expected to keep being an important computing plat-
form in the future, and innovations in their architecture are going
to be key to provide rich user experiences in many domains. These
innovations rely on research done both in industry and academia,
and cycle-level simulators play a key role in this process. How-
ever, there is scarce information on the architecture of modern
commercial GPUs, and most current academic studies are based
on simulators [18, 53] that use the Tesla microarchitecture [55] as
the baseline, which was launched in 2006. GPU architectures have
undergone significant changes since Tesla, hence, the reported find-
ings when evaluating a new idea may differ for a more up-to-date
model.
This work aims to bridge this gap by unveiling key features and
details of modern NVIDIA GPU architectures, and incorporating
them in a state-of-the-art GPU simulator. This improved simulator
is shown to provide much higher accuracy when compared with
real hardware. For instance, for an Ampere RTX A6000 GPU, the
improved model has an average error in estimated execution time
of 13.45%, which is less than half of the error of the original sim-
ulator (34.03%). Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work that models the latest NVIDIA GPU architecture,
Blackwell, with high accuracy, achieving a MAPE of 17.41%. These
results demonstrate the relevance of our findings for recent NVIDIA
architectures. A more accurate GPU model will allow researchers
to better identify challenges and opportunities for improving future
GPUs.
In summary, this work makes the following contributions:
• It discloses the operation of the issue stage, including dependence
handling, readiness conditions of warps, and the issue scheduler
policy.
• It presents a plausible operation of the fetch stage and its scheduler.
• It provides key details of the register file and the register file
cache. Moreover, it shows that modern NVIDIA GPUs do not use
an operand collection stage or collector units.
• It reveals multiple details of the data and instruction memory
pipeline.
1
© Owner/Author | ACM 2025. This is the author's version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version
of Record was published in: Rodrigo Huerta, Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary, José-Lorenzo Cruz, and Antonio Gonzalez. 2025. Dissecting and Modeling the
Architecture of Modern GPU Cores. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO '25). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 369–384. https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756041
Rodrigo Huerta, Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary, José-Lorenzo Cruz, and Antonio González
Scoreboard
RAW/WAW
Scoreboard
WAR
Instruction
Buffer
GTO Issue
INT 32 FP 32
Tensor
cores
Special
function
Local execution units
Sub-core Sub-core Sub-core
L1 data cache
Shared memory
Memory unit
L1 instruction cache
Decode
Fetch
Decode
Fetch
Decode
Fetch
Decode
Fetch
Dispatch
Bank 0
Bank 1
Register file
CU 0
CU 1
CUs
Operand collection
SM/Core
WB
Sub-core
4
1
1
Figure 1: SM/Core model of Accel-sim.
• We redesign the SM/core model used in Accel-sim simulator [53]
from scratch and integrate all the findings revealed in this work
into the model.
• We validate the new model against real hardware, including the
latests NVIDIA architecture (Blackwell) and compare it against
the Accel-sim simulator [53]. The new model achieves a mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) of execution cycles against real
hardware of 13.45%, whereas the previous simulator model has a
MAPE of 34.03%.
• We show that the software-based dependence management system
of modern GPUs that we unveil in this paper is a more efficient
alternative than traditional scoreboards in terms of performance
and hardware cost.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we intro-
duce some background and motivation of this work in section 2.
In section 3, we explain the reverse engineering methodology that
we have employed. Then, we describe the control bits in modern
NVIDIA GPU architectures and their detailed behavior in section 4.
Later, we present the core microarchitecture of these GPUs in sec-
tion 5. Next, we describe changes we have performed in the baseline
Accel-sim simulator in section 6. Section 7 evaluates the accuracy of
our model against real hardware and compares it to the Accel-sim
framework simulator. It also analyzes the impact of various mi-
croarchitecture features, and compares different dependence man-
agement mechanisms. Section 8 reviews related work and finally,
section 9 summarizes the main conclusions of this work.
2 Background and Motivation
Most GPU architecture research in academia relies on the model that
GPGPU-Sim simulator implements [1, 18]. Recently, this simulator
was updated to include sub-cores (Processing Blocks in NVIDIA
terminology) that started to be used in Volta. Figure 1 shows a
block diagram of the architecture modeled in this simulator. We
can observe that it comprises four sub-cores and some shared com-
ponents, such as the L1 instruction cache, L1 data cache, shared
memory, and texture units. Below, we summarize some of the key
components of this model.
In the Fetch stage, a round robin scheduler selects four warps
and requests two instructions per warp from the L1 instruction
cache. A warp is eligible to be selected if its Instruction Buffer is
empty. This model does not take into account to which sub-core
the warps belong, and most instructions are modeled as performing
the fetch and decode stages in the same cycle [43]. The Instruction
Buffer is a private buffer per warp to store the instructions after
they are fetched and decoded. Instructions stay in this buffer until
they are ready and selected to be issued.
In the Issue stage, the scheduler selects a warp among those not
waiting on a barrier and with its oldest instruction ready follow-
ing a Greedy Then Oldest (GTO) [85] policy. Each warp has two
scoreboards for checking the data dependence. The first one marks
pending writes to the registers to track WAW and RAW dependen-
cies. An instruction can be issued only when all its operands are
cleared in this scoreboard. The second scoreboard counts the num-
ber of in-flight consumers of registers to prevent WAR hazards [63].
The second scoreboard is necessary because although instructions
are issued in-order, their operands might be fetched out of order,
due to the assumption of an operand collection unit, which may
delay the read of source operands. Besides, memory instructions
are sent to operand collection after being issued and may read its
source operands after a younger arithmetic instruction writes its
result.
Once an instruction is issued, it is placed in a Collector Unit (CU)
to retrieve its source register operands. Each sub-core has a private
register file with multiple banks that can be accessed in parallel. An
arbiter deals with the possible conflicts among several petitions to
the same bank. When all source operands of an instruction are in the
CU, the instruction moves to the Dispatch stage, where it is assigned
to the proper execution unit (e.g., memory, single-precision, special
function) whose latencies differ depending on the unit type and
instruction. After execution, the instruction reaches the write-back
stage in which the result is written in the register file.
This GPU microarchitecture modeled in Accel-sim [53] resem-
bles NVIDIA GPUs based on Tesla [55], which was released in
2006, and updated with a few modern features, mainly a sub-core
model and sectored caches with IPOLY [83] indexing similar to
Volta [53]. However, it lacks some important components that
are present in modern NVIDIA GPUs, such as the L0 instruction
cache [21, 29, 70, 71, 73–76] and the uniform register file [21]. More-
over, some main components of sub-cores, such as the issue logic,
register file, or register file caches, among others, are not updated
to reflect current designs.
A main challenge to develop an accurate model of modern GPU
cores is that most of these details have not been disclosed. This work
aims to reverse engineer the microarchitecture of the core in mod-
ern NVIDIA GPUs and update Accel-sim to incorporate the unveiled
features. This will allow users of this updated Accel-sim simulator
to make their work more relevant by starting with baselines closer
to those proven successful by the industry in commercial designs.
2
