𝜌Hammer: Reviving RowHammer Attacks on New Architectures
via Prefetching
Weijie Chen
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
weijie_chen@hust.edu.cn
Shan Tang∗
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372164@hust.edu.cn
Yulin Tang∗
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372045@hust.edu.cn
Xiapu Luo
The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Yinqian Zhang†
Southern Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Shenzhen, China
yinqianz@acm.org
Weizhong Qiang‡
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
wzqiang@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Rowhammer is a critical vulnerability in dynamic random access
memory (DRAM) that continues to pose a significant threat to
various systems. However, we find that conventional load-based
attacks are becoming highly ineffective on the most recent archi-
tectures such as Intel Alder and Raptor Lake. In this paper, we
present 𝜌Hammer, a new Rowhammer framework that systemati-
cally overcomes three core challenges impeding attacks on these
new architectures. First, we design an efficient and generic DRAM
address mapping reverse-engineering method that uses selective
pairwise measurements and structured deduction, enabling recov-
ery of complex mappings within seconds on the latest memory
controllers. Second, to break through the activation rate bottleneck
of load-based hammering, we introduce a novel prefetch-based
hammering paradigm that leverages the asynchronous nature of
x86 prefetch instructions and is further enhanced by multi-bank
parallelism to maximize throughput. Third, recognizing that specu-
lative execution causes more severe disorder issues for prefetching,
which cannot be simply mitigated by memory barriers, we develop
a counter-speculation hammering technique using control-flow
obfuscation and optimized NOP-based pseudo-barriers to maintain
prefetch order with minimal overhead. Evaluations across four
latest Intel architectures demonstrate 𝜌Hammer’s breakthrough ef-
fectiveness: it induces up to 200K+ additional bit flips within 2-hour
attack pattern fuzzing processes and has a 112× higher flip rate than
the load-based hammering baselines on Comet and Rocket Lake.
Also, we are the first to revive Rowhammer attacks on the latest
Raptor Lake architecture, where baselines completely fail, achieving
stable flip rates of 2,291/min and fast end-to-end exploitation.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Yinqian Zhang is affiliated with Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous
Systems and the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of SUSTech.
‡Weizhong Qiang is the corresponding author and affiliated with Jinyinhu Laboratory,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, and Hubei Engineering Research
Center on Big Data Security.
This is the author’s version of the work accepted at the 58th IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25). The version published by ACM is at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756042.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy → Hardware attacks and countermea-
sures; Side-channel analysis and countermeasures.
Keywords
Rowhammer, Prefetching, DRAM Address Mapping, Speculative
Execution, Memory Barrier, Security, Reliability
1 Introduction
Rowhammer is a well-known circuit-level vulnerability within
DRAM that exploits the read disturbance effect to flip the value
stored in memory cells (a.k.a. activation-induced bit flips, AIB [50])
by repeatedly opening and closing their nearby DRAM rows for
sufficient times. Since its first-time discovery [35], this critical issue
has drawn profound attention from both industry and academia for
over a decade. At its core, Rowhammer attack enables the manipu-
lation of memory contents without directly accessing them, which
has proven its potential to compromise a wide range of systems
and application scenarios, such as privilege escalation and model
intelligence degradation [5, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 22, 28, 43, 57, 60, 62–
64, 68, 69, 73, 74], and resulted in significant security implications
on system isolation and trusted computing [21, 23, 53, 55, 70, 71].
Currently, it has been widely acknowledged that the Rowham-
mer issue would keep exacerbating with the evolution of DDR
standards and the ever-increasing density of DRAM cells [35].
In response, valiant efforts have been made to address this is-
sue [1, 3, 38, 41, 54, 72, 77], with target row refresh (TRR) cur-
rently being the most widely implemented defense mechanism in
off-the-shelf DDR4 devices. TRR works by periodically refreshing
a subset of rows being frequently activated, thereby effectively
preventing early Rowhammer strategies that relied on simple pat-
terns like the double-sided hammering (i.e., two aggressor rows
sandwiching one victim row) [42, 48, 49]. Unfortunately, recent
research [14, 18, 29, 30, 37] has demonstrated that the TRR mitiga-
tion within DDR4 DRAMs can be effectively bypassed, particularly
through the state-of-the-art non-uniform hammering techniques
that confuse the TRR sampler in identifying the real victim rows.
arXiv:2510.16544v1
[cs.CR]
18
Oct
2025
