arXiv:2503.20481v1 [cs.AR] 26 Mar 2025

Analyzing Modern NVIDIA GPU cores
Rodrigo Huerta

Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

José-Lorenzo Cruz

Antonio González

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
GPUs are the most popular platform for accelerating HPC workloads, such as artificial intelligence and science simulations. However, most microarchitectural research in academia relies on GPU
core pipeline designs based on architectures that are more than 15
years old.
This paper reverse engineers modern NVIDIA GPU cores, unveiling many key aspects of its design and explaining how GPUs
leverage hardware-compiler techniques where the compiler guides
hardware during execution. In particular, it reveals how the issue
logic works including the policy of the issue scheduler, the structure
of the register file and its associated cache, and multiple features
of the memory pipeline. Moreover, it analyses how a simple instruction prefetcher based on a stream buffer fits well with modern
NVIDIA GPUs and is likely to be used. Furthermore, we investigate
the impact of the register file cache and the number of register file
read ports on both simulation accuracy and performance.
By modeling all these new discovered microarchitectural details,
we achieve 18.24% lower mean absolute percentage error (MAPE)
in execution cycles than previous state-of-the-art simulators, resulting in an average of 13.98% MAPE with respect to real hardware
(NVIDIA RTX A6000). Also, we demonstrate that this new model
stands for other NVIDIA architectures, such as Turing.
Finally, we show that the software-based dependence management mechanism included in modern NVIDIA GPUs outperforms a
hardware mechanism based on scoreboards in terms of performance
and area.

1

Introduction

In recent years, GPUs have become very popular for executing
general-purpose workloads [21] in addition to graphics. GPUs’ architecture provides massive parallelism that can be leveraged by
many modern applications such as bioinformatics [23, 59], physics [52,
87], and chemistry [39, 89], to name a few. Nowadays, GPUs are
the main candidates to accelerate modern machine learning workloads, which have high memory bandwidth and computation demands [27]. Over the last years, there have been significant innovations in GPUs’ microarchitecture, their interconnection technologies (NVLink [63]), and their communication frameworks (NCCL [64]).
All these advances have enabled inference and training of Large Language Models, which require clusters with thousands of GPUs [56].
However, there is scarce information on the microarchitecture
design of modern commercial GPUs, and current academic studies [17, 49] take the Tesla microarchitecture [51] as the baseline,
which was launched in 2006. Today GPU architectures has undergone significant changes since Tesla, hence, a model based on that

can deviate the reported findings. This work aims to unveil different
features and details of various components that modern NVIDIA
GPU architectures use to improve the accuracy of academic microarchitecture models. The model and details explained in this
work allow researchers to better identify challenges and opportunities for improving future GPUs. In summary, this paper makes the
following contributions:
• Describes the operation of the issue stage, including dependence handling, readiness conditions of warps, and the
issue scheduler policy.
• Describes a plausible operation of the fetch stage and its
scheduler that coordinates with the issue stage.
• Provides important details of the register file and explains
the behavior of the register file cache. Moreover, it shows
that modern NVIDIA GPUs do not use an operand collection stage or collector units.
• Reveals multiple details of the components of the memory
pipeline.
• Redesigns the SM/core model used in Accel-sim simulator
[49] from scratch and integrates all the details we revealed
in this paper into the model.
• Validates the new model against real hardware and compares it against the Accel-sim simulator [49]. Our new
model achieves a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE)
of execution cycles against real hardware of 13.98% for the
NVIDIA RTX A6000 (Ampere), which is 18.24% better than
the previous simulator model.
• Demonstrates that a naive stream buffer for instruction
prefetching provides a greater performance accuracy, and
its performance is similar to a perfect instruction cache.
• Shows how the register file cache and the number of register
file read ports affect simulation accuracy and performance.
• Compares the performance, area, and simulation accuracy
of the dependence management system that we unveil in
this paper against the traditional scoreboard. The comparison reveals that this novel software-hardware co-design
is a more efficient alternative than handling dependencies
with traditional scoreboards.
• Shows the portability of the model to other NVIDIA architectures such as Turing.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce
the background and motivation of this work in section 2. In section 3, we explain the reverse engineering methodology that we
have employed. We describe the control bits in modern NVIDIA
GPU architectures and their detailed behavior in section 4. Later,
we present the core microarchitecture of these GPUs in section 5.

Huerta and Abaie, et al.

Next, we describe the features we have modeled in our simulator in
section 6. Section 7 evaluates the accuracy of our model against real
hardware and compares it to the Accel-sim framework simulator,
analyzes the impact of a stream buffer for instruction prefetching, studies the effect of the register file cache and the number of
register file read ports, compares different dependence management mechanisms, and discusses how the model stands for other
NVIDIA architectures. Section 8 reviews previous related work.
Finally, section 9 summarizes the main lessons of this work.

2

Background and Motivation

Most GPU microarchitecture research in academia relies on the
microarchitecture that GPGPU-Sim simulator employs [1, 17]. Recently, this simulator was updated to include sub-cores (Processing
Blocks in NVIDIA terminology) approach that started in Volta. Figure 1 shows a block diagram of the architecture modeled in this
simulator. We can observe that it comprises four sub-cores and
some shared components, such as the L1 instruction cache, L1 data
cache, shared memory, and texture units.
Sub-core
Instruction
Buffer
Scoreboard Scoreboard
RAW/WAW
RAW

L1 instruction cache
Fetch

Fetch

Fetch

Fetch

Decode Decode Decode Decode
4

GTO Issue
Operand collection
Register file
CUs
CU 0
Bank 0
CU 1
Bank 1
WB

Dispatch
Local execution units
INT 32
FP 32
Tensor
cores

Special
function

Sub-core

Sub-core

Sub-core

1

Memory unit
L1 data cache
Shared memory
1

instructions are issued in-order, their operands might be fetched
out of order. This happens for variable-latency instructions such
as memory instructions. These instructions are queued after being
issued and may read its source operands after a younger arithmetic
instruction writes its result, causing a WAR hazard if the source
operand of the former is the same as the destination operand of the
latter.
Once an instruction is issued, it is placed in a Collector Unit
(CU) and waits until all its source register operands are retrieved.
Each sub-core has a private register file with multiple banks and a
few ports per bank, allowing for multiple accesses in a single cycle
at a low cost. An arbiter deals with the possible conflicts among
several petitions to the same bank. When all source operands of
an instruction are in the CU, the instruction moves to the Dispatch
stage, where it is dispatched to the proper execution unit (e.g.,
memory, single-precision, special function) whose latencies differ
depending on the unit type and instruction. Once the instruction
reaches the write-back stage, the result is written in the register
file.
This GPU microarchitecture modeled in Accel-sim [49] resembles NVIDIA GPUs based on Tesla [51], which was released in 2006,
and updated with a few modern features, mainly a sub-core model
and sectored caches with IPOLY [75] indexing similar to Volta [49].
However, it lacks some important components that are present in
modern NVIDIA GPUs, such as the L0 instruction cache [20, 28, 65–
69] and the uniform register file [20]. Moreover, some main components of sub-cores, such as the issue logic, register file, or register
file caches, among others, are not updated to reflect current designs.
This work aims to reverse engineer the microarchitecture of the
core in modern NVIDIA GPUs and update Accel-sim to incorporate the unveiled features. This will allow users of this updated
Accel-sim simulator to make their work more relevant by starting
with baselines closer to those proven successful by the industry in
commercial designs.

SM/Core

Figure 1: SM/Core academia design.
In the Fetch stage of this GPU pipeline, a round robin scheduler
selects a warp whose next instruction is in the L1 instruction cache
and has empty slots in the Instruction Buffers. These buffers are
dedicated per warp and store the consecutive instructions of a warp
after they are fetched and decoded. Instructions stay in this buffer
until they are ready and selected to be issued.
In the Issue stage, a Greedy Then Oldest (GTO) [77] scheduler selects a warp if it is not waiting on a barrier and its oldest instruction
does not have data dependence with other in-flight instructions
in the pipeline. Previous works assume that each warp has two
scoreboards for checking the data dependence. The first one marks
pending writes to the registers to track WAW and RAW dependencies. An instruction can be issued only when all its operands
are cleared in this scoreboard. The second scoreboard counts the
number of in-flight consumers of registers to prevent WAR hazards [57]. The second scoreboard is necessary because although

3

Reverse Engineering Methodology

This section explains our research methodology for discovering the
microarchitecture of the cores (SMs) in NVIDIA Ampere GPUs.
Our approach is based on writing small microbenchmarks that
consist of few instructions and measure the execution time of a
particular small sequence of instructions. The elapsed cycles are
obtained by surrounding a region of the code with instructions that
save the CLOCK counter of the GPU into a register, and store it in
main memory for later post-processing. The evaluated sequence of
instructions typically consists of hand-written SASS instructions
(and their control bits). Depending on the test, we visualize the
recorded cycles to confirm or refute a particular hypothesis about
the semantics of the control bits or a particular feature in the microarchitecture. Two examples to illustrate this methodology are
given below:
• We have used the code in Listing 1 to unveil the conflicts
of the multi-banked register file (subsection 5.3). Replacing
R_X and R_Y by odd numbers (e.g., R19 and R21), we get
an elapsed time of five cycles (the minimum since each
sub-core can issue one instruction per cycle). If we change
R_X to an even number (e.g., R18) while maintaining R_Y

