𝜌Hammer: Reviving RowHammer Attacks on New Architectures
via Prefetching
Weijie Chen
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
weijie_chen@hust.edu.cn
Shan Tang∗
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372164@hust.edu.cn
Yulin Tang∗
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372045@hust.edu.cn
Xiapu Luo
The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Yinqian Zhang†
Southern Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Shenzhen, China
yinqianz@acm.org
Weizhong Qiang‡
Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
wzqiang@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Rowhammer is a critical vulnerability in dynamic random access
memory (DRAM) that continues to pose a significant threat to
various systems. However, we find that conventional load-based
attacks are becoming highly ineffective on the most recent archi-
tectures such as Intel Alder and Raptor Lake. In this paper, we
present 𝜌Hammer, a new Rowhammer framework that systemati-
cally overcomes three core challenges impeding attacks on these
new architectures. First, we design an efficient and generic DRAM
address mapping reverse-engineering method that uses selective
pairwise measurements and structured deduction, enabling recov-
ery of complex mappings within seconds on the latest memory
controllers. Second, to break through the activation rate bottleneck
of load-based hammering, we introduce a novel prefetch-based
hammering paradigm that leverages the asynchronous nature of
x86 prefetch instructions and is further enhanced by multi-bank
parallelism to maximize throughput. Third, recognizing that specu-
lative execution causes more severe disorder issues for prefetching,
which cannot be simply mitigated by memory barriers, we develop
a counter-speculation hammering technique using control-flow
obfuscation and optimized NOP-based pseudo-barriers to maintain
prefetch order with minimal overhead. Evaluations across four
latest Intel architectures demonstrate 𝜌Hammer’s breakthrough ef-
fectiveness: it induces up to 200K+ additional bit flips within 2-hour
attack pattern fuzzing processes and has a 112× higher flip rate than
the load-based hammering baselines on Comet and Rocket Lake.
Also, we are the first to revive Rowhammer attacks on the latest
Raptor Lake architecture, where baselines completely fail, achieving
stable flip rates of 2,291/min and fast end-to-end exploitation.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Yinqian Zhang is affiliated with Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous
Systems and the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of SUSTech.
‡Weizhong Qiang is the corresponding author and affiliated with Jinyinhu Laboratory,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, and Hubei Engineering Research
Center on Big Data Security.
This is the author’s version of the work accepted at the 58th IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25). The version published by ACM is at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756042.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy → Hardware attacks and countermea-
sures; Side-channel analysis and countermeasures.
Keywords
Rowhammer, Prefetching, DRAM Address Mapping, Speculative
Execution, Memory Barrier, Security, Reliability
1 Introduction
Rowhammer is a well-known circuit-level vulnerability within
DRAM that exploits the read disturbance effect to flip the value
stored in memory cells (a.k.a. activation-induced bit flips, AIB [50])
by repeatedly opening and closing their nearby DRAM rows for
sufficient times. Since its first-time discovery [35], this critical issue
has drawn profound attention from both industry and academia for
over a decade. At its core, Rowhammer attack enables the manipu-
lation of memory contents without directly accessing them, which
has proven its potential to compromise a wide range of systems
and application scenarios, such as privilege escalation and model
intelligence degradation [5, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 22, 28, 43, 57, 60, 62–
64, 68, 69, 73, 74], and resulted in significant security implications
on system isolation and trusted computing [21, 23, 53, 55, 70, 71].
Currently, it has been widely acknowledged that the Rowham-
mer issue would keep exacerbating with the evolution of DDR
standards and the ever-increasing density of DRAM cells [35].
In response, valiant efforts have been made to address this is-
sue [1, 3, 38, 41, 54, 72, 77], with target row refresh (TRR) cur-
rently being the most widely implemented defense mechanism in
off-the-shelf DDR4 devices. TRR works by periodically refreshing
a subset of rows being frequently activated, thereby effectively
preventing early Rowhammer strategies that relied on simple pat-
terns like the double-sided hammering (i.e., two aggressor rows
sandwiching one victim row) [42, 48, 49]. Unfortunately, recent
research [14, 18, 29, 30, 37] has demonstrated that the TRR mitiga-
tion within DDR4 DRAMs can be effectively bypassed, particularly
through the state-of-the-art non-uniform hammering techniques
that confuse the TRR sampler in identifying the real victim rows.
arXiv:2510.16544v1
[cs.CR]
18
Oct
2025
Weijie Chen, Shan Tang, Yulin Tang, Xiapu Luo, Yinqian Zhang, and Weizhong Qiang
Nonetheless, it seems that Rowhammer attacks have not evolved
to be more potent over time as anticipated. Both this paper and re-
cent literature [30, 33] acknowledge that such attacks are becoming
increasingly difficult to realize on newer platforms. After system-
atically investigating the four most recent Intel architectures, we
identify the following non-trivial challenges and propose a novel
prefetch-based Rowhammer framework, 𝜌Hammer, which is sig-
nificantly more effective than conventional load-based attacks and
revives Rowhammer on the latest architectures.
Challenge I: Complex DRAM Address Mappings
A critical prerequisite for launching effective Rowhammer at-
tacks is the ability to reverse-engineer the correct DRAM address
mapping of the target system in order to precisely locate the victim
rows. While numerous techniques [30, 56, 65, 68] have been pro-
posed, they primarily rely on incomplete heuristics that become
impractical as architectural complexity increases. For instance, in
this paper, we identify that the latest Alder/Raptor Lake architec-
tures adopt more intricate mapping schemes with expanded bank
bit ranges and bank function combinations, which is likely in re-
sponse to their supporting DDR5 with extra bank groups [24, 31].
To overcome these limitations, we present a new layout-agnostic
reverse-engineering methodology that leverages selective pairwise
measurements and structured deduction to accurately and gener-
ically recover mappings across architectures. Meanwhile, it also
achieves high efficiency and scalability by addressing the combina-
torial explosion issue of prior brute-force-based approaches. Eval-
uation across our hardware setups demonstrates that our method
recovers complete mappings within 10 seconds while all available
tools completely fail on Alder/Raptor Lake.
Challenge II: Insufficient Activation Rate
One major motivation of ours stems from observing that exist-
ing Rowhammer methods, which primarily rely on memory load
instructions (e.g., x86 MOV) for DRAM accesses and memory bar-
rier instructions to maintain their order [8, 9, 14, 19, 27, 29, 30, 33],
are not as effective on newer architectures as originally reported,
especially on the most recent Alder/Raptor Lake platforms where
they consistently fail. A deeper analysis of this paper reveals that
the activation rate of these methods still requires further improve-
ment to make Rowhammer attacks (more) generic and exploitable.
To address this, we introduce a novel prefetch-based hammering
paradigm that leverages the asynchronous and non-blocking char-
acteristics of x86 prefetch instructions to significantly enhance the
hammering throughput. In addition, by combining prefetching with
the multi-bank technique, we are able to amplify our attacks even
further through bank-level parallelism.
Challenge III: Speculative Disorder Hazard of Prefetching
Modern speculative execution mechanisms, particularly out-of-
order (OoO) execution and branch prediction, present a significant
challenge to Rowhammer attacks by disrupting the intended in-
struction order and thereby reducing the overall hammering effec-
tiveness. While both load-based and prefetch-based hammering are
affected by this issue, we find that prefetch instructions exhibit even
more severe disorder, particularly on the latest Alder/Raptor Lake
platforms. Even worse, unlike explicit memory reads, prefetching
performs implicit accesses and cannot be reliably ordered following
the traditional wisdom of using barrier instructions. To overcome
the disorder issue, we develop a counter-speculation hammering
technique that combines runtime control flow obfuscation with
carefully tuned NOP-based pseudo-barriers. This technique miti-
gates the reordering effects derived from both OoO execution and
branch prediction, restoring more controllable prefetching behavior
that unlocks the potential of prefetch-based hammering.
Our evaluation demonstrates a substantial leap in attack effec-
tiveness with 𝜌Hammer compared to the conventional load-based
Rowhammer baselines. During our large-scale 2-hour fuzzing pro-
cesses, we observe a maximum of over 200K additional bit flips
on Comet Lake alone. Even on newer Alder/Raptor Lake plat-
forms where the baseline fails to produce any meaningful bit flips,
𝜌Hammer consistently induces thousands. Moreover, repeated at-
tack simulations across diverse physical locations reveal 𝜌Hammer’s
high stability and practicality: 𝜌Hammer achieves sustained flip
rates of 187K/min and 47K/min on Comet/Rocket Lake, representing
112.4x and 47.1x improvements over the baseline. On Alder/Raptor
Lake, it further maintains highly practical rates of 995/min and
2,291/min, while the baseline could reproduce none.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a generic and efficient DRAM address mapping
reverse-engineering method that uese structured pairwise
measurements without any prior knowledge and assump-
tions about the mapping pattern, achieving full mapping
recovery within 10 seconds across all tested recent plat-
forms.
• We introduce a novel prefetch-based Rowhammer attack
paradigm that significantly boosts activation rate by lever-
aging the asynchronous nature of prefetch instructions,
further enhanced by combining it with multi-bank paral-
lelism.
• We develop a counter-speculation hammering technique
that mitigates the intensified disorder effects of OoO ex-
ecution and branch prediction, enabling more effective
prefetch-based Rowhammer on the latest architectures.
• We open-source our implementation on Github at https:
//github.com/rhohammer/rhohammer and evaluate our at-
tack on four recent Intel architectures and show that it
achieves orders-of-magnitude higher in bit flip counts and
flip rates compared to load-based baselines, including Alder
and Raptor Lake platforms where baselines consistently
fail.
Responsible Disclosure. We have reported potential security
impact of 𝜌Hammer to related parties, including Intel, MSI, and
Samsung. The PSIRT of both Intel and MSI have been actively
collaborating with us to investigate and address the issue. The MSI
PSIRT promptly released a fix addressing the issue.
2 Background
2.1 Dynamic Random Access Memory
DRAM is a volatile memory technology widely equipped as the
main memory in modern computers, which is usually available on
the market in the form of dual inline memory modules (DIMM).
Figure 1 shows an overview of the DRAM organization. A DIMM
communicates with the memory controller (MC) through one of the
channels and has chips on one or both sides (i.e., single/dual-rank).
Each channel operates independently, while each rank processes
