                                         Note: This paper has been accepted for publication at the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitec-
                                         ture (MICRO ’25) and is available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756036



                                                F LEXING RISC-V I NSTRUCTION S UBSET P ROCESSORS TO
                                                                   E XTREME E DGE


                                                                 Alireza Raisiardali ∗                                             Konstantinos Iordanou
                                                           Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd                                         Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
arXiv:2505.04567v3 [cs.AR] 28 Oct 2025




                                                            400 Cambridge Science Park                                          400 Cambridge Science Park
                                                      Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK                                 Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
                                                       araisiardali@pragmaticsemi.com                                       kiordanou@pragmaticsemi.com

                                                                   Jedrzej Kufel                                                    Kowshik Gudimetla
                                                            Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd                                        Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
                                                            400 Cambridge Science Park                                          400 Cambridge Science Park
                                                      Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK                                 Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
                                                           jkufel@pragmaticsemi.com                                          gkowshik@pragmaticsemi.com

                                                                      Kris Myny                                                               Emre Ozer
                                                           Katholieke Universiteit Leuven                                            Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
                                                Computer Security and Industrial Cryptography (COSIC)                                 400 Cambridge Science Park
                                                 Diepenbeek Campus, Wetenschapspark 27 - box 15152                              Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
                                                         3590 Diepenbeek, Leuven, Belgium                                            eozer@pragmaticsemi.com
                                                             kris.myny@kuleuven.be


                                                                                                       October 29, 2025

                                                                                                         A BSTRACT
                                                    This paper presents an automated approach for designing processors that support a subset of the
                                                    RISC-V instruction set architecture (ISA) for a new class of applications at Extreme Edge. The
                                                    electronics used in extreme edge applications must be area and power-efficient, but also provide
                                                    additional qualities, such as low cost, conformability, comfort and sustainability. Flexible electronics,
                                                    rather than silicon-based electronics, will be able to meet the above qualities. For this purpose, we
                                                    propose a methodology for generating RISC-V instruction subset processors (RISSPs) tailored to
                                                    these applications and implementing them as flexible integrated circuits (FlexICs). The methodology
                                                    makes verification an integral part of the processor design by treating each instruction in the ISA as a
                                                    discrete, fully functional, pre-verified hardware block. It automatically builds a custom processor by
                                                    stitching together the instruction hardware blocks required by an application or a set of applications
                                                    in a specific domain. We generate RISSPs using the proposed methodology for three extreme edge
                                                    applications, and embedded applications from the Embench benchmark suite. When synthesized,
                                                    RISSPs can achieve 8-to-43% reduction in area and 3-to-30% reduction in power compared to a
                                                    processor supporting the full RISC-V ISA, and are also on average ~40 times more energy efficient
                                                    than Serv - the world’s smallest 32-bit RISC-V processor. When physically implemented as FlexICs,
                                                    the three extreme edge RISSPs achieve up to 42% area and 21% power savings with respect to the
                                                    full RISC-V processor.

                                         Keywords RISC-V · Flexible electronics · FlexIC · Edge Computing
                                           ∗
                                               Also affiliated with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven




                                                     © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


1   Introduction

A new class of emerging applications requires embedded electronics capable of sensing, computing, and communicating
while also offering qualitative features such as low cost, conformability, comfort, biocompatibility, and sustainability in
addition to low power consumption. This new class of applications is now described as “Extreme Edge” which extends
beyond edge computing today [12].
Extreme edge applications can be classified into two main categories: 1) Short-lived applications that have short
lifetimes. Item-level intelligence, Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) and single-use healthcare products are
examples of short-lived applications. Since electronics are part of the product itself, they will have a short lifetime,
and any firmware/software update to the electronics will not be very likely. For instance, a smart dressing product has
built-in electronics to monitor wound healing conditions. The lifetime of the dressing is in the range of days before it is
replaced. The dressing and its built-in electronics will be disposed. 2) Long-lasting applications that have much longer
lifespan. Smart textile, wearable healthcare and environmental/agriculture monitoring are examples of long-lasting
extreme edge applications. For instance, the electronics embedded into a smart garment can be monitoring the health
status and performance of a person. The garment will be rewashed and reused in a lifespan of several months before it
wears out, and its built-in electronics may receive software/firmware updates during its lifetime. Table 1 summarizes
the application domains and features of these two categories.


        Table 1: Classification of extreme edge applications, application domains and distinct characteristics

                Category                                        Short-lived                                 Long-lasting
                                                                                                  Smart textile (e.g., smart garment
                                                 Item-level intelligence (e.g., smart
                                                                                                 and rugs), Wearable healthcare (e.g.,
                                                     labels), FMCG (e.g., smart
                                                                                                    implantables and ingestibles),
                Domains                          food/drink packaging), Single-use
                                                                                                      Environmental/agriculture
                                                  healthcare (e.g., patches, wound
                                                                                                     monitoring (e.g., smart plant
                                                              dressings)
                                                                                                               patches)
                                                  Ultra Low-cost, Conformability,                     Low-cost, Conformability,
    Required Qualitative Features
                                                 Patient Comfort and Sustainability              Biocompatibility and Sustainability
       Application Lifespan                                Days/Weeks                                       Months/Years
    Requirement of Software and
                                                                 Not likely                                      Very likely
        Firmware Updates

Conventional silicon-based electronics are unable to meet the requirements of extreme edge applications because they
do not satisfy many of the required features. For example, smart labels in asset tracking and smart packages in FMCG
are ultra cost-sensitive applications where electronics embedded into them must not cost more than a few cents per unit
to ensure economic viability. An electrocardiogram (ECG) patch requires a comfortable and conformable form factor in
electronics for the patient where conventional bulky electronics will cause discomfort. An implantable or ingestible
device must contain electronics that are biocompatible and conformable. The volume of extreme edge products in terms
of units is enormous, measured in a few trillions annually [35, 36, 19, 21]. If electronic devices are embedded into
such volume of products, they must be manufactured in sustainable semiconductor fabs that have a low environmental
footprint.
Flexible electronics [26] is an alternative technology that meets many of the qualities required by extreme edge. The
aim is to produce electronic components that include sensors, compute engines, communication interfaces, batteries
using low-cost printing, and lithography techniques on flexible substrates (e.g., plastic or paper). For example, flexible
integrated circuits (FlexICs) [34] can be fabricated using metal-oxide thin-film transistor technology on a polyimide
wafer, as shown in Figure 1.
The chips are ultra-thin, conformable, bendable and ultra-low cost [31], and the semiconductor fabs that manufacture
FlexICs have significantly lower carbon footprint per FlexIC than an equivalent Si chip [1]. Because the fabrication
process is low-cost and fast, the development of custom FlexICs specifically designed for an application or domain can
be faster and lower in cost than Silicon technology.
The performance requirements of the two extreme edge categories are not demanding where a sensor or an array of
sensors are connected to an analogue frontend to pre-process sensor raw signals that are converted into digital data and
handled by a digital backend to translate them into knowledge. The knowledge is stored and/or directly transmitted to
the external world through a communication interface (e.g., RF). Data sampling rates required by sensors are 200 Hz[6],


                                                                      2

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge




                                                       (a)                                                (b)

Figure 1: FlexIC technology. (a) A 200 mm wafer on a polyimide substrate, (b) A FlexIC is an integrated circuit
manufactured on a polyimide wafer substrate. The semiconductor material is metal-oxide called Indium-Gallium-Zinc-
Oxide (IGZO) that can be manufactured at low temperatures. The image of the FlexIC diced from the polyimide wafer
is shown. It is an ultra-thin (30 µm) and physically flexible or bendable.




which implies that digital backend processing speeds can be in the range of Hz for many extreme edge applications or
kHz for applications that require faster response.
Natively flexible smart systems [11] consisting of flexible electronic components, such as sensors, displays and batteries
coupled with compute engines, memory and communication units, are a natural fit for extreme edge. Both general-
purpose processors and domain-specific processing engines have been developed as FlexICs. For instance, the studies
in [25, 24, 7, 3, 31, 5] demonstrated natively flexible 4-bit, 8-bit and 32-bit general-purpose processors whilst others
proposed natively flexible domain-specific processing engines in the domains of RFID communication [23, 42], machine
learning [27, 30, 28, 29, 20, 33], security [6], and healthcare [32, 43]. These natively flexible processors have been
shown to operate at the kHz range reaching up to 100 kHz, which is sufficient to meet the performance requirements of
extreme edge applications.
Although designing a domain-specific processing engine is more efficient than a general-purpose processor, it takes a
considerable time to design, test and verify the design if the ASIC approach is taken for domain-specific processing.
An alternative is to use an application-specific instruction processor (ASIP) [40, 2], where the instruction sets are
customized based on the application or domain. However, this approach needs to generate not only the ASIP but also
the associated software toolset, such as a compiler, linker and simulator.
In this paper, we propose a methodology for automatically generating domain-specific processors for extreme edge
applications. The proposed methodology relies on the open standard RISC-V [41] instruction set architecture (ISA)
and generates processors that use only a subset of the RISC-V full ISA (e.g., RV32I). We observe (see Section 4)
that extreme edge and extreme edge-like embedded applications only use 24-86% of the full RISC-V ISA. Thus, a
processor supporting a subset of the full RISC-V ISA can be more efficient in terms of performance, power and area
(PPA) because the logic related to the unused instructions is avoided. We define them as RISC-V Instruction SubSet
Processors or RISSPs.
The RISSP generation methodology takes a very different approach to a processor microarchitecture where verification
is an integral part of the design process. The main concept is to design a RISSP from pre-verified building blocks rather
than the traditional design-followed-by-verification approach. First, the semantics of all instructions in the ISA are
written in RTL as instruction hardware blocks. Then, they are formally verified, and stored into a library. A RISSP is
formed by extracting the required instruction hardware blocks from the library, composing them in a modular manner
and reducing the verification effort significantly. Since extreme edge applications do not require high-speed operating
clock frequencies, single-cycle non-pipelined RISSPs suffice to meet their performance requirements.
The RISSP generation methodology avoids the significant effort of generating proprietary software toolsets specific
to ASIPs by relying on the RISC-V software ecosystem. For short-lived extreme edge applications, we predict that
RISSPs do not need software updates due to the short life of electronics embedded in the extreme edge device. For
long-lasting extreme edge applications, occasional software updates to RISSPs are needed. In this context, the updated
application(s) need to be recompiled but the generated code must be constrained to the instruction subset supported by
the target RISSP. This requires several modifications in the RISC-V compiler (e.g., gcc) backend to constrain code
generation to the instruction subset of the RISSP. However, these modifications involve various challenges at multiple
levels of the compiler stack. Instead, we develop a Generative AI-based tool that receives the assembly code of the


                                                                      3

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge



                  Step 0                        Step 1                            Step 2                            Step 3
             Full RISC-V
             Instruction                    Application
                 Set                              or                        Pre-verified Full ISA
         instrx                         a set of applications                Hardware Library                                           IMEM IF
                                                                                                                 RTL Stitcher           DMEM IF
                RTL                                                                                                                     Register File
             Description
         instrx.sv                    Compile for full RISC-V ISA    Instx        Instx          Instx       Redundancy removal
             Verification                                           HW Block     HW Block       HW Block      by Synthesis tools
         instrx                            Analyze & extract
        HW Block                          Instruction Subset
                                                                                                                    RISSP
                                                                                ModularEX
        Pre-verified Full ISA              Domain-specific
         Hardware Library                  Instruction Set




Figure 2: RISSP generation methodology. STEP 0: Development of the pre-verified full ISA hardware library, which is
the one-time development effort of the methodology; STEP 1: Generation of domain-specific instruction subset from an
application or a set of applications from a domain; STEP 2: Pulling instruction hardware blocks for the domain-specific
instruction set from the pre-verified full ISA hardware library, and formation of ModularEX; STEP 3: Construction of
the RISSP by stitching ModularEX with fixed units like memory interfaces and the register file


updated application(s) recompiled to the full ISA, and rewrites the new instructions that are not supported by the RISSP
in terms of the instruction subset.
The proposed methodology can automatically generate RISSPs that are 8-to-43% smaller and 3-to-30% lower power,
when synthesized, compared to a processor supporting the full RISC-V ISA, also generated by the same methodology,
and on average about 40 times more energy efficient than Serv [38]. When physically implemented as FlexICs, the
extreme edge RISSPs achieve up to 42% area and 21% power savings relative to the full RISC-V processor.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

      1. Automatic generation of RISC-V instruction subset processors (RISSPs) that implement only the subset of the
         RISC-V ISA targeting extreme edge applications, whilst still relying on the existing software ecosystem
      2. Design of a RISSP using a pre-verified instruction hardware block library to significantly reduce the verification
         time and time-to-market of RISSPs
      3. A Generative AI based tool to retarget the new instructions in the updated application(s) to the instructions in
         the instruction subset supported by RISSP for long-lasting extreme edge applications

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work in processor customization.
Section 3 presents the proposed methodology of generating RISSPs. Section 4 describes the experimental evaluation and
also presents the physical implementation results of RISSPs as FlexICs. Section 5 introduces the Generative AI-based
code recompilation/retarget framework. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2   Related Work
There are two main approaches in the design of domain-specific processors: i) Top-down or subtractive customization
approach where the customization is performed over an already designed processor by removing the gates that are not
used by the target application; ii) Bottom-up or additive approach where the customization is performed at the design
level by placing in the hardware blocks required by the applications.
PDAT [4] and Bespoke processors [10] are two examples of a subtractive customization approach. PDAT converts a
baseline processor into a standard netlist and uses property assertions to determine whether a specific gate is utilized
during the execution of an embedded application. It exploits gate-level property checking to replace unused cells with
wires if the relevant property is not asserted. Bespoke processors focus on the development of processing hardware from
a baseline processor customized to a specific application. It uses input-independent gate activity analysis to remove
the gates from the baseline processor that do not toggle during execution, resulting in a bespoke processor. The main
disadvantage of the subtractive approach is that the opportunity of finding and removing a large number of unused gates


                                                                      4

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


and hardware blocks in a baseline processor is limited because processors are typically designed as lean as possible.
For example, an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) is shared among many instructions, and these subtractive approaches are
conservative to remove the portions of the ALU even if some of the ALU-using instructions can be removed.
ASIPs [18, 22, 40, 2] use an additive customization approach in which they create the custom instruction set for the
target application or domain and then generate the ASIP that executes the custom instruction set. A complete software
toolchain (e.g., a compiler, assembler, linker and simulator) is also generated to support the ASIP, which is an overhead.
They adopt conventional processor microarchitecture techniques, and verification is not an integral part of the design.
Conventional verification strategies must be used after generating ASIPs.
On the other hand, verification is an integral part of the RISSP generation methodology, and RISSPs are created in a
bottom-up approach using the novel pre-verified instruction hardware block library concept reducing the verification
effort of the generated custom processor. In addition, RISSPs rely on open-source software toolchain of the RISC-V
software ecosystem rather than producing a new software toolchain for a proprietary ISA like in ASIPs.

3     Methodology of RISSP Generation
RISC-V [41] is one of the most popular ISAs that is rapidly established in various embedded domains. A key design
principle of the RISC-V ISA is its modularity allowing computer architects to design custom processors based on the
requirements of the target application. Additionally, the built-in support for custom instructions offers a significant
advantage compared to other ISAs. While a modular ISA allows independent instruction groups to be separated and
combined based on the application requirements, the modularity of the ISA implementation depends on how these
instruction groups or extensions are designed in hardware. It is important to note that a modular ISA does not necessarily
infer that the underlying implementation of the ISA is modular. Unless the ISA implementation inherently supports
“instruction-level modularity”, the only way to remove a subset of the ISA is to modify the actual RTL design. However,
removing support for a subset of the ISA from the actual ISA implementation is not straightforward and requires a deep
understanding of the RTL implementation of the processor supporting the ISA. This process may introduce errors in the
design and extensive verification is necessary to ensure that the modifications maintain the functionality.
One of the key benefits of this work is to enhance the instruction-level modularity of the ISA implementation by defining
instructions as independent, fully functional, pre-verified RTL blocks.

3.1   Concept of Instruction Hardware Blocks

The RISSP generation methodology relies on the RISC-V ISA and its software toolchain. A RISSP is automatically
generated for a given application or a domain of similar applications, as shown in Figure 2. It starts with the development
of the pre-verified full ISA hardware library (see Step 0). This is a one-time effort for a given ISA. The pre-verified
full ISA hardware library contains “formally verified” instruction hardware blocks, and is, in concept, similar to
the standard cell library designed for a process technology used in chip design and implementation, which will be
described in Section 3.4.1. Next, we characterize the application or the domain of applications by compiling them
to the target RISC-V ISA (in our case RV32E) to identify the domain-specific instruction subset (see Step 1). The
hardware description of each instruction in the instruction subset is called “instruction hardware block” written in RTL
(i.e., SystemVerilog), and extracted from a pre-verified full ISA hardware library of all instructions in RISC-V ISA.
Each instruction in the RISC-V ISA can be thought of as a discrete, fully functional hardware block. Table 2 highlights
the block diagram of each instruction type in the ISA. The semantics of each instruction is converted into its hardware
description in RTL, along with a glue logic interfacing with the Register File (RF) and the memory. The extracted
instruction hardware blocks are then automatically combined to build the Modular Execution Unit (ModularEX).

3.2   Modular Execution Unit

ModularEX is the main execution unit of the generated RISSP. It consists of a switch that handles the instruction
hardware blocks and their interfaces. The switch is automatically generated and ensures that the outputs of the
instruction-under-execution module are triggered. It is a simple case statement in SystemVerilog with N cases, where N
is the number of the instructions in the sub-ISA. The instruction hardware blocks are integrated with the switch into
ModularEX (fully combinational design).
In Step 3 - Figure 2, ModularEX is stitched to the memory interfaces and the RF to generate an unoptimised RISSP,
which is an input to the hardware synthesis tool that optimizes it by maximizing sharing inside ModularEX. The output
is the final RISSP tailored to the application or the domain under consideration, which is fully programmable within the
boundaries of its instruction subset.


                                                                      5

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                     Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge



   Table 2: A high-level overview of instruction hardware blocks of the RISC-V RV32I/E ISA

            Type                  Instructions                                Block Diagram
                                                                            rs1_data     rs2_data

                                                                 pc
                            beq, bne, blt, bge, bltu,                                                  next_pc
           B-type
                                     bgeu                                          b-type
                                                                  insn

                                                                           rs1_addr    rs2_addr
                                                                      rdest_data rs1_data rs2_data

                                                                 pc
                          add, sub, sll, slt, sltu, xor,                                               next_pc
           R-type
                               srl, sra, or, and                                   r-type
                                                                 insn

                                                                      rdest_addr rs1_addr rs2_addr
                                                                      rdest_data rs1_data to DMEM

                                                                 pc
                           lb, lh, lw, lbu, lhu, addi,                                                 next_pc
            I-type         slli, slti, sltiu, xori, srli,                          i-type
                              srai, ori, andi, jalr              insn

                                                                      rdest_addr            rs1_addr
                                                                      rdest_data rs1_data rs2_data

                                                                 pc                                    to DMEM
           S-type                   sb, sh, sw                                     s-type
                                                                 insn                                  next_pc

                                                                      rdest_addr rs1_addr rs2_addr
                                                                              rdest_data

                                                                       pc
                                                                                                next_pc
           U-type                   lui, auipc                                   u-type
                                                                       insn

                                                                              rdest_addr
                                                                              rdest_data

                                                                       pc
                                                                                                next_pc
            J-type                      jal                                        j-type
                                                                       insn

                                                                              rdest_addr




                                                            6

© 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                 Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


3.3     RISSP Construction

Figure 3 shows the construction of a RISSP by stitching ModularEX with the rest of the fixed units such as the fetch
unit and the RF as well as memory interfaces. By construction, a RISSP has a single-cycle processor microarchitecture
where an instruction is fetched from the instruction memory using a 32-bit Program Counter (PC), and sent to the
ModularEX unit. Then, the switch selects the actual instruction hardware block of the fetched instruction executing it at
the same cycle. In other words, the switch performs as a partial decoder that selects which block will be enabled at
every clock cycle. The full decoding of the instruction is performed inside each instruction block.

                                                                     RISSP
                              From RF
                                                                                  next_pc              next_pc
                                                        pc
                                                      insn
                                                               Instruction       To RF
                                                   From RF
                                                             Hardware Block                                      Register
                                    next_pc     From dmem                         To dmem
                                                                                                                   File
                                         pc                                                            To RF




                                                                                              SWITCH
           From/To
                                  PC
            imem                         insn                                     next_pc
                                                        pc                                                                   To dmem
                                 FETCH                insn                        To RF
                                                               Instruction
                                                   From RF
                                                             Hardware Block       To dmem
           From                                 From dmem
           dmem
                                                   ModularEX                log2(#ofblocks)


Figure 3: A single-cycle RISSP microarchitecture created by stitching together ModularEX, the fixed units (i.e., Fetch
and RF) and Memory Interfaces

The key benefit of the RISSP generation methodology is that it does not require any expertise in microarchitecture,
RTL design or gate netlists. The only input of the framework is the domain-specific instruction subset identified by the
application or the domain. All design optimization decisions are taken by the synthesis tool rather than optimizing the
design manually. This is a conscious decision because contemporary commercial/non-commercial hardware synthesis
tools are very efficient in discovering redundancies and eliminating them. For instance, the synthesis tool will optimize
the gate netlists by maximizing the resource sharing if multiple instruction hardware blocks have common operations
among them (e.g., design flattening). Any logic optimization performed during synthesis will be formally verified using
equivalence checking by the synthesis tool. This approach may not lead to "minimal area/power" but minimizes the
design and verification time.

3.4     Verification

Verification is a critical and complex phase in processor design. The fundamental benefit of the proposed methodology
is the ability to streamline and simplify the verification process.

3.4.1    Development of the Pre-verified Full ISA Hardware Library
Generating a RISSP using the novel concept of a pre-verified ISA hardware library significantly reduces the verification
complexity of RISSP. The full ISA hardware library has been extensively verified in multiple ways including formal
verification. The development of the pre-verified ISA hardware library is a one-time verification effort that becomes
the non-recurring-engineering (NRE) cost of RISSP. The NRE is amortized by the number of RISSPs shipped during
the lifetime of this library. In contrast, any new design in conventional CPU/ASIP methodologies requires design and
verification, i.e., verification effort becomes a recurring cost.
The full ISA hardware library is a collection of instruction hardware blocks written in SystemVerilog. The library
supports the RISC-V RV32I/E instruction set and is fully extendable to support other groups of RISC-V instructions or
even custom instructions. Each instruction hardware block is formally verified against its specification in the ISA. This
is a significant step towards instruction modularity in the RISSP design and its simplified verification. One of the key
advantages of this approach is that verification of instruction hardware blocks is integrated into the RISSP development
process. Every instruction hardware block is formally pre-verified before it is used for the generation of a RISSP.
Figure 4 presents the development process of the pre-verified full ISA RTL library. Starting with the RTL design, the
instruction semantics are combined with pre-developed standard interfaces - used for communication with the rest of the


                                                                        7

            © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                    Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


                           RTL Design                        2                          RTL Verification

                          DMEM Interface                        Instruction
                                                              Hardware Block               Instruction              Instruction
                                   attach                                                Hardware Block           Hardware Block
 Instruction                Instruction                                                                                                      Pre-verified
  semantics               Hardware Block                                                                                                       Full ISA
                                                                   custom                    custom                 SVA-based                 hardware
                                                                  testbench                 testbench               testbench                  library
                          attach           attach
                                                                                        Mutation Cover         Formal Verification
                  IMEM Interface   RF Interface                     RISC-V              with Yosys (mcy)        SymbiYosys (sby)
                                                                 Architecture
                  1                                                Test SIG         3                         4

                               Figure 4: The development of the pre-verified full ISA hardware library


processor - to define the actual instruction hardware block (Figure 4 - 1 ). Following the design phase, there are three
distinctive verification steps before including the new instruction hardware block in the library. This process includes:
(a) the development of a testbench that automatically verifies the instruction hardware block using standard test cases
(Figure 4 - 2 ), (b) self-checking of the testbench to ensure that can verify the instruction hardware block under test
(Figure 4 - 3 ), and (c) the formal verification of the instruction hardware block using SystemVerilog Assertions (SVA)
(Figure 4 - 4 ).
For functional verification, individual test cases from the RISC-V Foundation Architecture Test SIG [15] are auto-
matically extracted for each instruction hardware block, and custom testbenches have been developed to verify these
test cases. Specifically, RISC-V Foundation Architecture Test Suite provides an extensive set of test cases for each
instruction, developed in Assembly, ensures that the RISC-V specification has been interpreted correctly and the
implementation of the target processor is RISC-V Architecture test compliant. The toolflow automatically isolates
the tests cases for each instruction, transforms them in a binary format, and passes the test vector to the instruction
hardware block through our custom testbenches. This process iteratively verifies each instruction hardware block for
the complete set of test cases.
To further extend our verification framework of the library, each testbench is evaluated with MCY tool from YosysHQ
suite [17]. MCY is one of the most popular tools for verification primarily because it offers the ability to generate
several mutations of the target RTL design (in our case the implemented instruction blocks). The tool automatically
selects only the mutated designs that can cause an important change in the output of the design by filtering them using
formal verification techniques. The final step is to automatically check that the testbench can detect and fail for the
mutations that can cause an important change in the output of the target design. Under this environment, we ensure that
our testbenches are capable of verifying the target instruction hardware blocks.
In terms of formal verification, the full ISA library is formally verified using SymbiYosys [14] (sby), a frontend for Yosys
for Formal Verification. For every instruction hardware block, a set of SVA are developed to ensure that the instruction
semantics are satisfied. Also, additional assertions are used to validate the behavior of the interfaces. This approach
simplifies the verification process of a RISSP, as each instruction hardware block is already independently and formally
verified. Moreover, the process benefits from the well-defined semantics of each instruction in the ISA.
Instruction hardware block representations of all instructions in the ISA are functionally and formally verified and are
stored in the pre-verified full ISA hardware library. When constructing a RISSP, instruction hardware blocks from the
library will be stitched together to build the ModularEX that does not require any further verification. Therefore, the
pre-verified full ISA hardware library concept is similar to the concept of standard cell libraries in VLSI design where
the standard cell library for a foundry process is created once and re-used in many chip designs. Each cell is a fully
verified building block in a finer granularity.

3.4.2      Integration-level Verification

The pre-verified ModularEX is integrated into the pre-verified fixed units, such as fetch and register file to construct the
RISSP. Various verification processes and unit-tests have been developed to ensure the correctness of the integrated
RISSP. They include custom domain checks at various points, such as checks at instruction and register level to verify
that each instruction is fetched and executed correctly. Additionally, RISC-V compatibility is tested with RISCOF, an
architectural test framework [16]. RISCOF automatically chooses a set of test cases for the RV32E ISA, the RISSP
executes these test cases, and writes a signature to a file. Then, this signature is compared with a signature of a reference
model that has been obtained from a RISC-V simulator, such as Spike [37].


                                                                                8

               © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                 Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


In terms of formal verification at processor-level, RISSP has been verified up to a specific depth with riscv-formal
[13]. This framework is an open-source standard for the formal verification of RISC-V processors and is based on the
RISC-V Formal Interface (RVFI), a standard interface for processors to communicate and verification tools. Specifically,
RISSP implements the RVFI interface that mainly tracks valid instructions, register file data and addresses, PC changes
and memory accesses. With riscv-formal, we perform various and extensive checks at instruction level for correct
execution, checks to ensure that the registers maintain consistency, and PC checks that verify the correct PC values
before and after the execution of an instruction.
                                             Total Number of Static Instructions (Codesize in KBytes)
30                       Compiler Flags
          --O0       --O1        --O2        --O3         --Oz
25
20
15
10
 5
 0


                                                          Number of Distinct Instructions
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
       t64
         32
        bic
                           hu edn

                            tm h
                             md int
                                     um

                                      er
                           ne dy

                            e-s s
                            ns 56
                             pic eu
                            me g

                     sg qrd t
                          -co no

                                       d
                                        e

                                                                                                 tem t
                                                                                                      ate

                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                ud

                                                                                                                        arm t
                                                                                                                      xg it
                                                                                                                     af_ ost
                                                                                                                               t
                                    un




                                                                                                       s




                                                                                                                            or




                                                                                                                           tec
                         ttl ae




                                    slr
                         ma benc




                         pri jpe




                                   ine




                                                                                                     fin




                                                                                                                            p
                                  nv
                                    o
     crc




                                    2
                                    n




                       lib ui
                                    -
     cu




                                                                                                                   kis
                                 5s




                                                                                                                         bo
     on




                                 co
                                ult




                      ne ttle-
                                nb


                                ha
                               ich




                                                                                                 tar




                                                                                                                        de
                              mb
                                 o
                               mi




                                                                                                                  wi
    a-m




                              ff




                                                                                                sta
ah




Figure 5: Results of instruction profiling and characterization of the three extreme edge applications, and the benchmarks
in Embench using different compiler optimization flags. The top diagram presents the codesize in KBytes and the
bottom diagram illustrates the number of distinct instructions from the RV32E ISA across different optimization flags.



4     Experimental Evaluation
One of the key challenges in evaluating the RISSP generation methodology is the lack of a representative benchmark
suite for extreme edge. We select two extreme edge applications previously demonstrated in the FlexIC technology [29]
[32], and also an ML kernel XGBoost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting) [9] as one of the key ML algorithms used in many
classification tasks as an extreme edge kernel.
Extreme edge application 1: Armpit malodour classification or armpit [29] is a real-world application in the domain of
deodorant industry that advocates the use of flexible organic sensors to detect volatile organic components in odour
with a sensor readout interface and machine learning hardware implemented as a custom FlexIC to score malodour
in a human armpit. It is a representative example of a natively flexible smart system [11] consisting of all flexible
components from sensors to processing. Two decision trees (one for each gender) are implemented in hardware to
classify armpit malodour. The decision trees in the armpit application are used as the benchmark in this paper. The C
code of the decision trees was compiled to RV32E to generate a RISSP for the application.
Extreme edge application 2: Atrial fibrillation (AF) detection or af_detect [32] is another real-world application in the
domain of ECG that uses flexible electronics to detect AF events in a wearable ECG patch. An AF prediction algorithm


                                                                        9

            © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


called “Approximate Pair Presence Tracking” or APPT was implemented as a custom FlexIC. APPT has three stages: i)
detection of R peaks in the ECG signal; ii) calculation of RR intervals (the interval between two R peaks) and delta of
RR intervals; iii) a Bloom filter-based binary predictor (AF versus non-AF) using a RR and delta RR interval map. The
APPT algorithm in af_detect is used as the benchmark in this paper, which is compiled for RV32E to generate a RISSP.
Extreme edge kernel: XGBoost [9] is known for its performance in classification and regression problems. It is a more
accurate and scalable implementation of gradient boosting. For datasets and problems with simpler requirements,
decision trees can be mapped on edge devices in the form of C/C++ or on custom hardware implementation processing
units to perform ML classification problems, e.g., armpit. We use XGBoost to extract a decision tree from a dataset and
then implement the generated decision tree in C/C++ to evaluate its RISSP requirements. It can be considered as a
kernel in extreme edge applications rather than a full application itself. For evaluation purposes, we use the pima indian
diabetes database [39], a binary-valued data set that predicts whether a patient shows signs of diabetes. The dataset
consists of 768 instances and 8 attributes.
We also select Embench that is an open-source benchmark suite for embedded systems. It is designed to support a wide
range of embedded systems and consists of 22 C-written applications. Although it may not be perfectly aligned with
the requirements of extreme edge, it offers a reasonable and structured approach to assess our methodology. The system
requirements for these applications require at least 64 KB of ROM and RAM. However, an operating system and output
stream are not required.

                   Table 3: List of distinct instructions per application when compiled with -O2 option


    Application                                               List of Distinct Instructions
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, or, slli, sltiu, sltu, srai, srli, sub,
     aha-mont64
                                                                        sw, xor, xori]
        crc32                     [add, addi, andi, bge, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, sltiu, srli, sub, sw, xor, xori]
        cubic                         [addi, and, andi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slti, sltiu, sw, xor]
         edn              [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, bne, jal, jalr, lh, lhu, lui, lw, sh, slli, sltiu, sra, srai, srli, sub, sw]
                           [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, or, ori, sb, sll, slli,
      huffbench
                                                                  sltiu, srai, srli, sub, sw]
     matmult-int                                [add, addi, bge, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, sltiu, sw]
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, or, sb, sll, slli, sltiu, srl, srli,
      md5sum
                                                                     sub, sw, xor, xori]
       minver                       [add, addi, and, beq, bge, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, slti, sltiu, sub, sw, xor]
       nbody                       [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, slti, sltiu, srli, sw]
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, or, sb, slli, sltiu, srli, sub,
      nettle-aes
                                                                            sw, xor]
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lhu, lui, lw, or, sb, slli, sltiu, sltu,
    nettle-sha256
                                                                      srli, sub, sw, xor]
      nsichneu                           [add, addi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, sltiu, sub, sw]
                         [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lb, lbu, lh, lhu, lui, lw, or, sb, sh,
      picojpeg
                                                   sll, slli, sltiu, sltu, sra, srai, srli, sub, sw, xori]
     primecount                            [add, addi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, sltiu, sw]
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lhu, lui, lw, or, ori, sb, sh, slli,
       qrduino
                                                  sltiu, sltu, sra, srai, srl, srli, sub, sw, xor, xori]
        sglib-            [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lh, lui, lw, sb, sh, slli, sltiu, sltu,
      combined                                                       srai, sub, sw, xori]
                        [add, addi, and, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, or, slli, slt, sltiu, sltu,
         slre
                                                                     srai, sub, sw, xori]
           st                            [add, addi, and, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, slli, slti, sltiu, sw]
      statemate                       [addi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, or, sb, sh, sltiu, sub, sw]
        tarfind            [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, sb, slli, sltiu, srli, sub, sw]
          ud                           [add, addi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, or, slli, sltiu, sub, sw]
       wikisort           [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lui, lw, or, slli, slt, sltiu, sltu, srai, srli, sub, sw]
        armpit                        [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, blt, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, slli, sltiu, sw]
       xgboost                                [addi, andi, bge, blt, jal, jalr, lui, lw, srli, sw, xor, xori]
                        [add, addi, andi, beq, bge, bgeu, blt, bltu, bne, jal, jalr, lbu, lui, lw, sb, sh, slli, sltiu, srai, srli,
      af_detect
                                                                         sub, sw, xor]


                                                                     10

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                                 Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


4.1     Instruction Subset Profile of Applications

Before generating a RISSP for each application, we need to characterize each application to identify the distinct
instructions from the RV32E instruction set required to implement each RISSP. The next step is to explore how the
number of distinct instructions is related to the codesize for different compiler optimization flags.
Figure 5 presents the profiling results of the applications from Embench and the three extreme edge applications.
The applications have been compiled for RV32E instruction set as baremetal (without support of stdlib, libc,
libgcc and startfiles) with different compiler optimization flags (–O0, –O1, –O2, –O3, –Oz) using the standard
riscv32-gnu-toolchain (version 13.2.0). Through this analysis, we identify the optimal code size with respect to
the distinct instructions for each application for the generation of RISSP. The number of distinct instructions ranges
from 9 to 32 instructions, and the average is 19 instructions for different optimization flags across all applications.
Since the RV32E ISA has around 40 instructions, applications use only 24-86% of the full ISA. For the extreme edge
applications, these numbers are 42% (armpit) 31% (xgboost), and 61% (af_detect). In terms of total number of static
instructions across the different compiler optimization results, the average across all the applications are 2027, 1149,
1207, 1586 and 1018 for –O0, –O1, –O2, –O3, and –Oz, respectively. For the extreme edge applications, we observe
a substantial reduction in static instructions, as we progress from –O0 to –0z. Specifically, using the –O2 optimization
level flag, we observe 75%, 74% and 69% less static instructions (reduction in codesize) than -O0 for armpit, xgboost
and af_detect, respectively, thus, the difference in the number of distinct instructions between –O2 and –Oz is negligible.
These results indicate that there is an opportunity to improve power/area of a 32-bit RISC-V processor by eliminating
unnecessary instructions and designing a customized RISSP for a target application. Given that the -O2 compiler flag
results in minimal discrepancies in average code size with respect to distinct instructions, we select it as the basis for
subsequent RISSP design for power, area and frequency analysis. Table 3 lists the number of distinct instructions per
application when compiled with -O2 option.

4.2     FlexIC Synthesis Results

The RTL of each RISSP is synthesized using Pragmatic’s 0.6µm IGZO-based FlexIC process using a commercial
EDA tool. Each RISSP is synthesized without the RF to better understand the effects of the instruction subsets in the
hardware. We also introduce two baselines to compare the RISSPs. The first baseline is an application-independent
RISC-V processor supporting the full RV32E ISA (~40 instructions) generated using the RISSP methodology. This is
called RISSP-RV32E. The second baseline is Serv [38], - the world’s smallest 32-bit RISC-V processor. Serv is a bit
serial processor supporting RV32I ISA, and its RF is mapped to on-chip memory rather than having a dedicated RF.
Serv is configured to support RV32E (i.e., 16 general purpose registers rather than 32).

                                             2100
                                                          RISSPs      RISSP-RV32E          Serv
                                             2000
                          Max. Frequency (kHZ)




                                             1900
                                             1800
                                             1700
                                             1600
                                             1500
                                             1400
                                                         aha-mont64
                                                                 crc32
                                                                 cubic
                                                                   edn
                                                           huffbench




                                                             picojpeg
                                                         matmult-int
                                                             md5sum
                                                               minver
                                                                nbody
                                                           nettle-aes
                                                      nettle-sha256
                                                            nsichneu
                                                         primecount
                                                              qrduino
                                                     sglib-combined
                                                                   slre
                                                                     st
                                                          statemate
                                                               tarfind
                                                                    ud
                                                             wikisort
                                                               armpit
                                                             xgboost
                                                            af_detect




                                                                            Applications
           Figure 6: Maximum clock frequencies at which RISSPs, RISSP-RV32E and Serv that can operate


4.2.1    Maximum Frequency Analysis
Figure 6 illustrates the maximum frequency (kHz) of RISSPs compared to the two baselines. To determine the
maximum operating frequency, we vary the input clock frequency while adjusting design constraints in the EDA tools.


                                                                             11

           © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                                     Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


Starting at 100 kHz with significant positive slack, the frequency was incremented by 25 kHz steps until reaching
3 MHz, where the design became over-constrained with negative slack. The highest frequency with positive slack
is identified as the maximum. The maximum clock frequencies of RISSPs range from 1,500 to 1,850 kHz, whilst
RISSP-RV32E and Serv can achieve up to 1,700 kHz and 2,050 kHz, respectively.

4.2.2   Area Analysis
Figure 7 presents the average area of the RISSP for each application and the baselines. The average area is calculated
from the NAND2-equivalent gatecounts of the processor across the range of frequencies with positive slack. RISSPs
occupy 8-to-43% less area compared to RISSP-RV32E. The smallest RISSP (i.e., xgboost) is 23% larger than Serv.

                                                              RISSPs        RISSP-RV32E        Serv
                                                 3500
                        Average - Area (NAND2GATE)



                                                 3000
                                                 2500
                                                 2000
                                                 1500
                                                 1000
                                                  500
                                                    0
                                                                    crct64
                                                                    c 32
                                                           mhauff uebic
                                                              tmbendn
                                                               mdult- ch
                                                                  m5s nt
                                                        ne ne ninvuem
                                                           ttl tt bo r
                                                              e-s le- dy
                                                              ns ha aes
                                                           pri piicchn256
                                                       sg meojpeu
                                                         lib q co eg
                                                                 mbuin t
                                                                     in o
                                                            sta slerd
                                                                 tem se
                                                                  tar at t
                                                                      f e
                                                                wi ind
                                                                   kis ud
                                                              afx_gbmo pritt
                                                                      tect
                                                                          t
                                                            -co rd un




                                                                  de os
                                                                  ar o
                                                                        i
                                                                   on
                                      a-m
                                    ah




                                                                                Applications
Figure 7: Average NAND2-equivalent gate count of RISSPs compared to Serv and RISSP-RV32E across the range of
frequencies with positive slack


                                                             RISSPs        RISSP-RV32E         Serv
                                                     1.4
                        Average - Power (mW)




                                                     1.2
                                                     1.0
                                                     0.8
                                                     0.6
                                                     0.4
                                                     0.2
                                                     0.0
                                      crct64
                                      c 32
                             mhauff uebic
                                tmbendn
                                 mdult- ch
                                    m5s nt
                          ne ne ninvuem
                             ttl tt bo r
                                e-s le- dy
                                ns ha aes
                             pri piicchn256
                         sg meojpeu
                           lib q co eg
                                   mbuin t
                                       in o
                              sta slerd
                                   tem se
                                    tar at t
                                        f e
                                  wi ind
                                     kis ud
                                afx_gbmo pritt
                                        tect
                                            t
                              -co rd un




                                    de os
                                    ar o
                                          i
                                     on
                               a-m
                             ah




                                                                               Applications
Figure 8: Average power (static + dynamic) comparison of the RISSPs, Serv and RISSP-RV32E across the range of
frequencies with positive slack


4.2.3   Power Analysis
Figure 8 shows the average power of the RISSP for each application and the baselines. The average powered is
calculated in a similar manner to Section 4.2.2. RISSPs consume 3-to-30% less power than RISSP-RV32E. Although
Serv has a lower gatecount compared to RISSPs and RISSP-RV32E, its power consumption is higher than them. For


                                                                                 12

         © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                         Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


example, it consumes 40% more power than RISSP-RV32E. This is mainly because Serv has a higher proportion of
flip-flops (FFs) compared to the RISSP microarchitecture, and an FF in the FlexIC process consumes 10 times more
power than a NAND2 gate.

4.2.4    Energy Efficiency
Figure 9 illustrates the Energy per Instruction (EPI) for the RISSPs, RISSP-RV32E and Serv. The x-axis represents the
RISSPs corresponding to each target application. Because a RISSP is a single-cycle processor, the clock cycles per
instruction (CPI) for RISSPs and RISSP-RV32E is 1. On the other hand, Serv is a bit-serial processor, and has a CPI of
32 on average. The EPI is calculated by dividing the power consumption of the design point at the maximum frequency
by that frequency and multiply the product by the CPI. The results highlight that RISSP-RV32E and RISSPs are about
35 and 40 times more energy-efficient than Serv. The bit-serial architecture of Serv leads to a high CPI resulting in
much higher energy consumption per instruction.

                                         aha-mont64                            RISSP-RV32E
                                                 crc32
                                                 cubic                         Serv
                                                   edn                         RISSPs
                                           huffbench
                                         matmult-int
                                             md5sum
                                               minver
                                                nbody
                                           nettle-aes                            35x compared to RISSP-RV32E
                          Applications




                                      nettle-sha256
                                            nsichneu
                                             picojpeg
                                         primecount
                                              qrduino
                                     sglib-combined
                                                   slre
                                                     st
                                          statemate
                                               tarfind
                                                    ud
                                             wikisort
                                               armpit
                                             xgboost
                                            af_detect
                                                                100                               101
                                                            Energy per Instruction (nanoJoules)
  Figure 9: Energy per Instruction (EPI) in nanoJoules for RISSPs and the two baselines (RISSP-RV32E, and Serv)


4.3     FlexIC Physical Implementation Results

We present full physical implementation of the three extreme edge RISSPs as FlexICs and compare them to full physical
implementation of the two baselines. RISSPs are generated for the instruction subsets from the applications compiled
with the –O2 flag. The physical implementation goes beyond hardware synthesis to full-fledged FlexIC layouts by
floorplanning, clock tree insertion, and place and route. The goal is to show that the full physical implementation-related
overheads (e.g., inserted buffers) do not hide the advantages of the RISSP philosophy (i.e., not supporting unnecessary
instructions in the processor is observably beneficial).
The physical implementation is initially started at the maximum clock frequency of each processor found at the synthesis
stage. Due to clock tree insertion and routing delays, the implementation cannot achieve the maximum clock frequency
for all processors. We follow an iterative implementation process to incrementally reduce the clock frequencies until all
processors became functional at 300 kHz. All processors are implemented at this frequency using typical and nominal
corner conditions with a supply voltage of 3V.
Figure 10 shows the layouts of the three RISSPs, RISSP-RV32E and Serv. RISSP-af_detect achieves an 8% reduction
in area compared to RISSP-RV32E whilst RISSP-armpit has the same area as Serv but reduces the area by ~35% with
respect to RISSP-RV32E. RISSP-xgboost achieves even further reduction by ~11% and ~42% over Serv and RISSP-
RV32E. This is because Serv has a high proportion of FFs (i.e., 60%), and therefore requires more clock tree buffers,
which increases its area despite the fact that the synthesis results indicating that Serv is smaller than RISSP-xgboost.
The two baselines RISSP-RV32E and Serv have almost the same power consumption in spite of Serv being ~35%
smaller than RISSP-RV32E. This is again because of the high proportion of FFs in Serv whereas FFs take up only ~6%


                                                                      13

           © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                                Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge




Figure 10: Layouts of the five implemented processors are shown. The leftmost layout corresponds to RISSP-RV32E.
Next are the three RISSPs for af_detect, armpit, and xgboost — each representing an extreme-edge application. The
rightmost layout is Serv. For each layout, the X and Y dimensions of the die area are shown in µm, along with the die
area (in mm²) and percentage of FFs being used in each design, on the bottom-left of each layout. The total power
consumption (in mW) is indicated on the bottom-right. Additionally, for the three RISSPs, the number of distinct
instructions implemented in each design is annotated.


of RISSP-RV32E. RISSP-af_detect consume almost the same power as Serv and RISSP-RV32E whilst RISSP-armpit
and RISSP-xgboost consume ~8% and ~21% less power than Serv and RISSP-RV32E, respectively.

                         Objectives
    (examples: use temporary registers or keep the codesize
                        to minimum)

                                              Transformation of the target instructions
                                                                                                  For each target instruction in the macro file:
                                                              based on                                                                                              Functionality            YES
             start       Prompt LLM                    the instruction subset                                                                                         verified                     custom_macro.S
                                                                                               Verify the generated implementation of the target
                                                                                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                               instruction with the original instruction semantics
                                                      (macro file is generated)
                                                                                                                                                                        NO



1. ; Abstract test program with 10 instructions                                                 1. ; Abstract test program with 10 instructions                              .macro instr_1
2.                                                                                              2.                                                                           ; implemented with instruction subset
3. start:                                                                                       3. start:                                                                    .endm
4.    instr_1      ; Initialize registers                                                       4.    instr_1      ; Initialize registers
5.    instr_2      ; Load input value                                                           5.    instr_2      ; Load input value                                        .macro instr_7
6.    instr_3      ; Compare input to threshold                                                 6.    instr_3      ; Compare input to threshold                              ; implemented with instruction subset
7.    instr_4      ; Jump to process if condition met                                           7.    instr_4      ; Jump to process if condition met                        .endm
8.                                                                                              8.
9. check_loop:                                                                                  9. check_loop:                                                               .macro instr_8
10.   instr_5      ; Increment loop counter                      Identify the instructions that 10.   instr_5      ; Increment loop counter                                  ; implemented with instruction subset
                                                                   are not part of the target-
11.   instr_6      ; Compare counter to limit                                                   11.   instr_6      ; Compare counter to limit                                .endm
                                                                       instruction subset                                                                  Generative
12.   instr_7      ; Jump back to check_loop if not done                                        12.   instr_7      ; Jump back to check_loop if not done
13.                                                                                             13.                                                           AI             .macro instr_9
14. process_data:                                                                               14. process_data:                                                            ; implemented with instruction subset
15.   instr_8      ; Process or transform data                                                  15.   instr_8      ; Process or transform data                               .endm
16.   instr_9      ; Store result to memory                                                     16.   instr_9      ; Store result to memory
17.                                                                                             17.                                                                          .macro instr_10
18. end_program:                                                                                18. end_program:                                                             ; implemented with instruction subset
19.   instr_10     ; Halt or return                                                             19.   instr_10     ; Halt or return                                          .endm

instruction subset = {instr_2,instr_3,instr_4,instr_5,instr_6}                        instruction subset = {instr_2,instr_3,instr_4,instr_5,instr_6}
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Target binary for
                                                                                                                                                                   riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc
                                                                                                                                                                                                   the instruction subset



Figure 11: Generative AI based tool to implement code retargeting for RISSPs used in long-lasting extreme edge
applications



5       Generative AI based Code Retargeting

Although the concept behind the RISSP generation is to rely on the RISC-V software ecosystem rather than generating
a custom software toolchain, long-lasting extreme edge applications need frequent software updates because the target
applications may change. For instance, applications need to be recompiled with different compiler optimization flags,
which may generate new instructions that are not supported by the RISSP under consideration.
There are two possible approaches to address this scenario. The first approach focuses on modifications at the compiler
backend that needs to be modified to receive the instruction subset implemented in the RISSP and constrain the assembly
code generation to this subset only. This method is not trivial and requires significant changes in the instruction selection
and code generation phases of the compiler backend. The second approach relies on the assumption that the assembly


                                                                                                        14

                 © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                                              Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


code is generated using standard compiler toolflows and a separate tool is responsible to transform the generated
assembly into a version that uses the instruction subset supported by the RISSP.
We follow the second approach where we develop a tool that uses generative AI to transform the assembly code
generated by the compiler targeting the full RISC-V ISA (e.g., riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc) to assembly code that
uses only the instructions in the instruction subset. This is an important step towards reusability of RISSPs after
fabrication. Figure 11 presents the retargeting framework along with a simple example. Given an application and
an instruction subset, the tool is able to identify the instructions that are not included in the instruction subset. Then,
with the use of ChatGPT RISC-V Assembly plugin [8], every instruction that is not part of the instruction subset is
transformed into a set of instructions that are included in the instruction subset and is defined as an independent macro.
The macros of the transformed instructions are stored in a macro.S file. Finally, the application is recompiled using
the standard riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc with the macro.S file.
Initially, we provide the instruction subset and the instructions that need to be transformed to the ChatGPT RISC-V
Assembly plugin. Objectives that restrict the solution space can be added based on the user preferences. For example,
such objectives could be “allow the use of temporary registers to provide a solution”, or, “keep the codesize to minimum
as you transform the instructions”. After that, the process of generating macros for the non-supported instructions
from the instruction subset begins. Then, the macros are verified against the original semantics of the transformed
instruction with custom test cases. If the LLM generates a macro that cannot be functionally verified, the macro is
rejected, and then another macro is requested from the LLM. This continues until a valid macro is generated. In our
experiments, a valid macro can be generated on less than 10 attempts.




                                                                 Initial                          36% increase
                                              3000               Retargeted
                          Code size (bytes)




                                                                     13% increase        5.2% increase
                                              2000

                                              1000

                                                             0
                                    Distinct Instructions




                                                            20
                                                            15
                                                            10
                                                             5
                                                             0
                                                                  armpit             xgboost               af_detect
Figure 12: Comparison of code size (bytes) and the number of distinct instructions between the initial binary and the
retargeted binary using LLM




To evaluate the above framework, we define a minimal instruction subset of twelve instructions {addi, add, and,
xori, sll, sra, jal, jalr, blt, bltu, lw, sw} from which other instructions can be reproduced. Armpit,
xgboost and af_detect can be defined as “long-lasting extreme edge applications”, as discussed in Section 4, and for this
experiment they are chosen as a case study to show the potential of the framework. The framework receives as input the
initial version of the target applications compiled with -O2, and attempts to transform the non-supported instructions of
the target applications to functionally relevant macro based on the instruction subset.
 Figure 12 shows that the code size after the recompilation of the applications are 13%, 5.2% and 36% larger than the
original version for armpit, xgboost and af_detect, respectively. The number of distinct instructions shows minimal
variation for armpit and xgboost, while the number of distinct instructions for af_detect is reduced from 23 to 12. This
experiment demonstrates the feasibility of this approach to efficiently retarget code but with an overhead of larger code
size and potentially slower runtime of the application.


                                                                                    15

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


6   Conclusions
We have proposed a methodology for automatically generating a single-cycle 32-bit RISC-V instruction subset processor
(RISSP) to be deployed as a FlexIC to meet the computing requirements of the extreme edge. The methodology
constructs a RISSP supporting only the instruction subset identified during the characterization of an extreme edge
application or domain. The semantics of each instruction in the RISC-V ISA are translated into a formally verified
and discrete, hardware block and stored in a library. The hardware blocks of the instruction subset are extracted from
the library, stitched together to build the core of the RISSP, which is then connected to the rest of the pre-verified
processor components to generate the RISSP. The RISSP methodology reduces the time-to-market of custom processors
by integrating verification as a primary design principle. The synthesis results have shown that RISSPs can achieve
8-to-43% reduction in area and 3-to-30% reduction in power compared to a processor supporting the full RISC-V ISA,
and are on average about 40 times more energy efficient than Serv- the world’s smallest 32-bit RISC-V processor. When
implemented as FlexICs, the RISSPs targeting extreme edge applications can achieve up to 42% and 21% less area and
power.
The proposed methodology can support custom instructions that can be added to the pre-verified ISA hardware library
like other instructions in the ISA. Also, the methodology can be extended to generate pipelined RISSPs if higher
clock frequencies are required but is not suitable for generating complex processors that have deeper superscalar and
out-of-order execution pipelines. Extreme edge applications do not require such high performance processors, so
our focus has been to develop a microcontroller-class RISSP that is a single-cycle scalar in-order execution machine
providing adequate performance for applications at extreme edge.

7   Acknowledgments
This work is partially funded by GRASP EU Project No 101134936. The authors would like to thank John Biggs, a
co-founder of Arm and a Pragmatic fellow, for his valuable inputs on physical implementation analysis, and also Bruce
Hoult from the RISCV sub-reddit forum for his comments on macro retargeting.

References
 [1] Ashiq Ahamed, Peng Huang, Joshua Young, Alejandro Gallego-Schmid, Richard Price, and Michael P. Shaver.
     Technical and environmental assessment of end-of-life scenarios for plastic packaging with electronic tags.
     Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 201:107341, 2024.
 [2] Kubilay Atasu, Laura Pozzi, and Paolo Ienne. Automatic application-specific instruction-set extensions under
     microarchitectural constraints. In Proceedings of the 40th annual Design Automation Conference, pages 256–261,
     2003.
 [3] John Biggs, James Myers, Jedrzej Kufel, Emre Ozer, Simon Craske, Antony Sou, Catherine Ramsdale, Ken
     Williamson, Richard Price, and Scott White. A natively flexible 32-bit arm microprocessor. Nature, 595(7868):532–
     536, 2021.
 [4] Nathan Bleier, John Sartori, and Rakesh Kumar. Property-driven automatic generation of reduced-isa hardware.
     In 2021 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), pages 349–354. IEEE, 2021.
 [5] Nathaniel Bleier, Calvin Lee, Francisco Rodriguez, Antony Sou, Scott White, and Rakesh Kumar. Flexicores:
     Low footprint high yield field reprogrammable flexible microprocessors. In Annual International Symposium on
     Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 831–846, 2022.
 [6] Nathaniel Bleier, M Husnain Mubarik, Suman Balaji, Francisco Rodriguez, Antony Sou, Scott White, and Rakesh
     Kumar. Exploiting short application lifetimes for low cost hardware encryption in flexible electronics. In 2023
     Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2023.
 [7] Hikmet Çeliker, Antony Sou, Brian Cobb, Wim Dehaene, and Kris Myny. Flex6502: a flexible 8b microprocessor
     in 0.8 µm metal-oxide thin-film transistor technology implemented with a complete digital design flow running
     complex assembly code. In 2022 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), volume 65, pages
     272–274. IEEE, 2022.
 [8] ChatGPT.    Chatgpt risc-v assembly,                       n.d.        [Online]. Available:             https://chatgpt.com/g/
     g-sKaAT8XCS-risc-v-assembly.
 [9] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm
     sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 785–794, 2016.


                                                                       16

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                               Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


[10] Hari Cherupalli, Henry Duwe, Weidong Ye, Rakesh Kumar, and John Sartori. Bespoke processors for applications
     with ultra-low area and power constraints. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on
     Computer Architecture, pages 41–54, 2017.
[11] Júlio Costa, Vincent Barlier, Hellen Norman, Emre Ozer, Feras Alkhalil, and Richard Price. 11-5: Invited paper:
     Evolving into an era of natively flexible smart systems. In SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, volume 54,
     pages 136–139. Wiley Online Library, 2023.
[12] eeNews.        How much ‘moore’ do we need?            new technologies for the ex-
     treme   edge!,   2025.       [Online]. Available:    https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/
     how-much-moore-do-we-need-new-technologies-for-the-extreme-edge/.
[13] GitHub. RISC-V Formal Verification Framework. https://github.com/SymbioticEDA/riscv-formal, .
[14] GitHub. SymbiYosys (SBY). https://github.com/YosysHQ/SymbiYosys, 2017.
[15] GitHub. RISC-V Architecture Test SIG. https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-arch-test, 2018.
[16] GitHub. RISCOF: RISC-V Architectural Compatibility Framework. https://github.com/riscv/riscof,
     2019.
[17] GitHub. MCY: Model Checking for Yosys. https://github.com/YosysHQ/mcy, 2020.
[18] Ricardo E Gonzalez. Xtensa: A configurable and extensible processor. IEEE micro, 20(2):60–70, 2000.
[19] Fortune Business Insights. Wound care devices market size, n.d. [Online]. Available: https://www.
     fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/wound-care-devices-market-100388.
[20] Konstantinos Iordanou, Timothy Atkinson, Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, Grace Aligada, John Biggs, Gavin Brown,
     and Mikel Luján. Low-cost and efficient prediction hardware for tabular data using tiny classifier circuits. Nature
     Electronics, 7(5):405–413, 2024.
[21] Markets and Markets. Environmental monitoring market size, n.d. [Online]. Available: https://www.
     marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/environmental-monitoring-market-216846315.html.
[22] Heinrich Meyr. Application specific instruction-set processors (asip’s) for wireless communications: design, cost,
     and energy efficiency vs. flexibility. In 2004 International Symposium on System-on-Chip, 2004. Proceedings.,
     pages 1–2. IEEE, 2004.
[23] Kris Myny, Yi-Cheng Lai, Nikolaos Papadopoulos, Florian De Roose, Marc Ameys, Myriam Willegems, Steve
     Smout, Soeren Steudel, Wim Dehaene, and Jan Genoe. 15.2 a flexible iso14443-a compliant 7.5 mw 128b
     metal-oxide nfc barcode tag with direct clock division circuit from 13.56 mhz carrier. In 2017 IEEE International
     Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), pages 258–259. IEEE, 2017.
[24] Kris Myny, Steve Smout, Maarten Rockelé, Ajay Bhoolokam, Tung Huei Ke, Soeren Steudel, Koji Obata, Marko
     Marinkovic, Duy-Vu Pham, Arne Hoppe, et al. 30.1 8b thin-film microprocessor using a hybrid oxide-organic
     complementary technology with inkjet-printed p 2 rom memory. In 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
     Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), pages 486–487. IEEE, 2014.
[25] Kris Myny, Erik van Veenendaal, Gerwin H. Gelinck, Jan Genoe, Wim Dehaene, and Paul Heremans. An
     8-bit, 40-instructions-per-second organic microprocessor on plastic foil. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits,
     47(1):284–291, 2012.
[26] Arokia Nathan, Arman Ahnood, Matthew T. Cole, Sungsik Lee, Yuji Suzuki, Pritesh Hiralal, Francesco Bonac-
     corso, Tawfique Hasan, Luis Garcia-Gancedo, Andriy Dyadyusha, Samiul Haque, Piers Andrew, Stephan Hofmann,
     James Moultrie, Daping Chu, Andrew J. Flewitt, Andrea C. Ferrari, Michael J. Kelly, John Robertson, Gehan A. J.
     Amaratunga, and William I. Milne. Flexible electronics: The next ubiquitous platform. Proceedings of the IEEE,
     100(Special Centennial Issue):1486–1517, 2012.
[27] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, John Biggs, Gavin Brown, James Myers, Anjit Rana, Antony Sou, and Catherine
     Ramsdale. Bespoke machine learning processor development framework on flexible substrates. In 2019 IEEE
     international conference on flexible and printable sensors and systems (FLEPS), pages 1–3. IEEE, 2019.
[28] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, John Biggs, James Myers, Charles Reynolds, Gavin Brown, Anjit Rana, Antony Sou,
     Catherine Ramsdale, and Scott White. Binary neural network as a flexible integrated circuit for odour classification.
     In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Flexible and Printable Sensors and Systems (FLEPS), pages 1–4.
     IEEE, 2020.
[29] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, John Biggs, Anjit Rana, Francisco J Rodriguez, Thomas Lee-Clark, Antony Sou,
     Catherine Ramsdale, Scott White, Suresh K Garlapati, Garlapati, Valliappan Palaniappan, Aiman Rahmanudin,
     Venuskrishnan Komanduri, Glenn S. Saez, Sankara Gollu, Gavin Brown, Piotr Dudek, Krishna C. Persaud,


                                                                     17

          © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
                              Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge


     Michael L Turner, Stephanie Murray, Susan Bates, Robert Treloar, Brian Newby, and Jane Ford. Malodour
     classification with low-cost flexible electronics. Nature Communications, 14(1):777, 2023.
[30] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, James Myers, John Biggs, Gavin Brown, Anjit Rana, Antony Sou, Catherine Ramsdale,
     and Scott White. A hardwired machine learning processing engine fabricated with submicron metal-oxide thin-film
     transistors on a flexible substrate. Nature Electronics, 3(7):419–425, 2020.
[31] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, Shvetank Prakash, Alireza Raisiardali, Olof Kindgren, Ronald Wong, Nelson Ng,
     Damien Jausseran, Feras Alkhalil, David Kong, et al. Bendable non-silicon risc-v microprocessor. Nature,
     634(8033):341–346, 2024.
[32] Emre Ozer, Jedrzej Kufel, Elena Punskaya, Igor Drokov, Ari Ercole, Hiral Radia, Thom Smith, John Biggs,
     Francisco Rodriguez, Grace Aligada, and Adam Rearden. A custom-designed atrial fibrillation detection hardware
     on a flexible substrate. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Flexible and Printable Sensors and Systems
     (FLEPS), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2024.
[33] Velu Pillai, Igor DS Miranda, Tejas Musale, Mugdha Jadhao, Paulo CR Souza Neto, Zachary Susskind, Alan TL
     Bacellar, Mael Lhostis, Priscila MV Lima, Diego LC Dutra, Eugene B John, Mauricio Breternitz, Felipe M. G.
     França, Emre Ozer, and Lizy K John. arrwnn: Arrhythmia-detecting weightless neural network flexic. In 2024
     IEEE International Flexible Electronics Technology Conference (IFETC), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2024.
[34] Pragmatic. FlexIC Platform Gen3. https://www.pragmaticsemi.com/foundry/flexic-platform-gen-3,
     2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.pragmaticsemi.com/foundry/flexic-platform-gen-3.
[35] Allied Market Research. Fmcg market expected to reach $18,939.4 billion by 2031, n.d. [Online]. Available:
     https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/press-release/fmcg-market.html.
[36] Transparency Market Research.             Smart patches market, n.d.         [Online]. Available: https://www.
     transparencymarketresearch.com/smart-patches-market.html.
[37] riscv-software src. Spike isa sim - github - riscv-software-src/riscv-isa-sim, n.d. [Online]. Available: https:
     //github.com/riscv-software-src/riscv-isa-sim.
[38] Serv. Bit-serial risc-v cpu - github - olofk/serv, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/olofk/serv.
[39] Jack W Smith, James E Everhart, William C Dickson, William C Knowler, and Robert Scott Johannes. Using the
     adap learning algorithm to forecast the onset of diabetes mellitus. In Proceedings of the annual symposium on
     computer application in medical care, page 261, 1988.
[40] Johan Van Praet, Gert Goossens, Dirk Lanneer, and Hugo De Man. Instruction set definition and instruction
     selection for asips. In Proceedings of 7th International Symposium on High-Level Synthesis, pages 11–16. IEEE,
     1994.
[41] Andrew Waterman, Yunsup Lee, David A Patterson, and Krste Asanovic. The risc-v instruction set manual,
     volume i: Base user-level isa. EECS Department, UC Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2011-62, 116:1–32, 2011.
[42] Piotr Zbigniew Wieczorek, Krzysztof Starecki, Krzysztof Gołofit, Maciej Radtke, and Marcin Pilarz. A thin
     elastic nfc forum type 1 compatible rfid tag. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 59(3):935–946, 2023.
[43] Mohammad Zulqarnain, Stefano Stanzione, Ganesh Rathinavel, Steve Smout, Myriam Willegems, Kris Myny, and
     Eugenio Cantatore. A flexible ecg patch compatible with nfc rf communication. npj Flexible Electronics, 4(1):13,
     2020.




                                                                    18

         © 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.
