Dissecting and Modeling the Architecture of
Modern GPU Cores
Rodrigo Huerta
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
José-Lorenzo Cruz
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Antonio González
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
GPUs are the most popular platform for accelerating HPC work-
loads, such as artificial intelligence and science simulations. How-
ever, most microarchitectural research in academia relies on simu-
lators that model GPU core architectures based on designs that are
more than 15 years old, and differ significantly from modern core
architectures.
This work reverse engineers the architecture of modern NVIDIA
GPU cores, unveiling key aspects of its design and the important
role of the compiler in some of its main components. In particular,
it reveals how the issue logic works, the structure of the register
file and its associated cache, multiple features of the instruction
and data memory pipelines.
When modeling all these discovered microarchitectural details in
a state-of-the-art simulation framework, we show that its accuracy
is significantly improved, achieving a 20.58% reduction in mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) on average, which results in a
13.45% MAPE on average with respect to real modern hardware.
In addition, we show that the software-based dependence man-
agement mechanism included in modern NVIDIA GPUs outper-
forms a hardware mechanism based on scoreboards in terms of
performance and area.
CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Single instruction, mul-
tiple data; Multicore architectures; • Computing methodolo-
gies → Modeling methodologies; Model verification and vali-
dation; Simulation evaluation; Simulation tools.
Keywords
GPGPU, GPU Core, GPU Microarchitecture, Modeling, Simulation,
Validation, Scheduling, Reverse engineering, NVIDIA, Turing, Am-
pere, Blackwell
1 Introduction
In recent years, GPUs have become very popular for executing
general-purpose workloads [22] in addition to graphics. GPUs’ ar-
chitecture provides massive parallelism that can be leveraged by
many modern applications such as bioinformatics [24, 65], physics [56,
96], and chemistry [41, 98], to name a few. Nowadays, GPUs are
the main candidates to accelerate modern machine learning work-
loads, which have high memory bandwidth and computation de-
mands [28]. Over the last years, there have been significant innova-
tions in GPUs’ microarchitecture, their interconnection technolo-
gies (NVLink [68]), and their communication frameworks (NCCL [69]).
All these advances have enabled inference and training of Large
Language Models, which require clusters with many GPUs [62].
GPUs are expected to keep being an important computing plat-
form in the future, and innovations in their architecture are going
to be key to provide rich user experiences in many domains. These
innovations rely on research done both in industry and academia,
and cycle-level simulators play a key role in this process. How-
ever, there is scarce information on the architecture of modern
commercial GPUs, and most current academic studies are based
on simulators [18, 53] that use the Tesla microarchitecture [55] as
the baseline, which was launched in 2006. GPU architectures have
undergone significant changes since Tesla, hence, the reported find-
ings when evaluating a new idea may differ for a more up-to-date
model.
This work aims to bridge this gap by unveiling key features and
details of modern NVIDIA GPU architectures, and incorporating
them in a state-of-the-art GPU simulator. This improved simulator
is shown to provide much higher accuracy when compared with
real hardware. For instance, for an Ampere RTX A6000 GPU, the
improved model has an average error in estimated execution time
of 13.45%, which is less than half of the error of the original sim-
ulator (34.03%). Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work that models the latest NVIDIA GPU architecture,
Blackwell, with high accuracy, achieving a MAPE of 17.41%. These
results demonstrate the relevance of our findings for recent NVIDIA
architectures. A more accurate GPU model will allow researchers
to better identify challenges and opportunities for improving future
GPUs.
In summary, this work makes the following contributions:
• It discloses the operation of the issue stage, including dependence
handling, readiness conditions of warps, and the issue scheduler
policy.
• It presents a plausible operation of the fetch stage and its scheduler.
• It provides key details of the register file and the register file
cache. Moreover, it shows that modern NVIDIA GPUs do not use
an operand collection stage or collector units.
• It reveals multiple details of the data and instruction memory
pipeline.
1
© Owner/Author | ACM 2025. This is the author's version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version
of Record was published in: Rodrigo Huerta, Mojtaba Abaie Shoushtary, José-Lorenzo Cruz, and Antonio Gonzalez. 2025. Dissecting and Modeling the
Architecture of Modern GPU Cores. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO '25). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 369–384. https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756041
