Delegato: Locality-Aware Atomic Memory Operations on Chiplets
Víctor Soria-Pardos
victor.soria@bsc.es
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Adrià Armejach
adria.armejach@upc.edu
Univseritat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Tiago Mück
tiago.muck@arm.com
Arm
Darío Suárez Gracia
dario@unizar.es
Universidad de Zaragoza
José A. Joao
jose.joao@arm.com
Arm
Miquel Moretó
miquel.moreto@upc.edu
Univseritat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Abstract
The irruption of chiplet-based architectures has been a game changer,
enabling higher transistor integration and core counts in a single
socket. However, chiplets impose higher and non-uniform memory
access (NUMA) latencies than monolithic integration. This harms
the efficiency of atomic memory operations (AMOs), which are
fundamental to implementing fine-grained synchronization and
concurrent data structures on large systems. AMOs are executed
either near the core (near) or at a remote location within the cache
hierarchy (far). On near AMOs, the core’s private cache fetches the
target cache line in exclusiveness to modify it locally. Near AMOs
cause significant data movement between private caches, especially
harming parallel applications’ performance on chiplet-based archi-
tectures. Alternatively, far AMOs can alleviate the communication
overhead by reducing data movement between processing elements.
However, current multicore architectures only support one type
of far AMO, which sends all updates to a single serialization point
(centralized AMOs).
This work introduces two new types of far AMOs, delegated
and migrating, that execute AMOs remotely without centralizing
updates in a single point of the cache hierarchy. Combining central-
ized, delegated, and migrating AMOs allows the directory to select
the best location to execute AMOs. Moreover, we propose Delegato,
a tracing optimization to effectively transport usage information
from private caches to the directory to predict the best atomic type
to issue accurately. Additionally, we design a simple predictor on
top of Delegato that seamlessly selects the best placement to per-
form AMOs based on the data access pattern and usage activity of
cores. Our evaluation using gem5 shows that Delegato can speed
up applications on average by 1.07× over centralized AMOs and by
1.13× over the state-of-the-art AMO predictor.
1 Introduction
Chiplet-based architectures have surpassed monolithic systems and
system-on-chip (SoC) designs in the semiconductor market [68, 74].
Chip vendors have adopted chiplet-based designs as a cost-effective
alternative for scaling multicores without increasing die size, en-
hancing yield and reducing costs [68, 116]. Compared to monolithic
systems, the main drawback is the introduction of interposers,
which increase the communication latency between chiplets and
© 2025 Owner/Author | ACM. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here
for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was
published in 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25),
October 18–22, 2025, Seoul, Republic of Korea, https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756030.
HIST RSOR BC LULESH BFS SPMV
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Speed-up
A B C
S-Near S-Centralized D-Near D-Centralized
Figure 1: Speed-up of single-chiplet (S) and dual-chiplet (D)
Grace CPU configurations using near and centralized AMOs.
Normalized w.r.t. single-chiplet near AMOs execution time.
NUMA effects [33, 87]. This harms the performance of latency-
sensitive operations such as Atomic Memory Operations (AMOs),
which are extensively used to synchronize parallel workloads.
All modern instruction set architectures (ISAs) feature AMOs to
perform atomic read-modify-write (RMW) operations on memory,
such as Armv9 [49], x86 [53], RISC-V [111], and Nvidia PTX [94].
AMOs are fundamental for updating shared data directly or creating
high-level synchronization mechanisms such as mutually exclusive
locks, barriers, and lock-free data structures. ISAs continuously
extend their AMO support to include more complex primitives,
reducing the programmers’ burden. For instance, x86 has recently
introduced conditional increment AMOs (CMPccXADD) [53], and
Arm has introduced floating-point AMO extensions (LSFE) [51].
AMOs require dedicated support from coherence protocols to
ensure correct cache behavior. Most systems perform AMOs within
the private levels of the cache hierarchy by acquiring exclusive
permission of the targeted cache line, performing the RMW op-
eration locally (near AMOs) [4]. Alternatively, centralized AMOs
send all updates for a cache line to a single designated location,
typically the corresponding directory slice, where the RMW op-
eration is performed remotely [48, 70, 99]. Therefore, centralized
AMOs aggregate updates at the directory, avoiding cache line migra-
tion across multiple private caches [29, 102]. However, centralized
AMOs can trigger invalidations that may cause future data misses.
Figure 1 illustrates the performance impact of near and central-
ized AMOs on six applications running on NVIDIA’s Grace CPU
Superchip [93], evaluated under single-chiplet and dual-chiplet con-
figurations. The two chiplets are interconnected via NVLink, which
offers high bandwidth but incurs significant latency. GCS supports
cross-chiplet atomics, which send AMOs remotely to the directory
where the cache line resides, reducing data movement over NVLink.
In the single-chiplet configuration, centralized AMOs consistently
outperform near AMOs across all benchmarks. However, in dual-
chiplet configurations, we observe three distinct behaviors, labeled
A, B, and C in Figure 1. In category A, centralized AMOs exhibit
lower performance in a dual-chip setup than in a single-chiplet
1
C0 C1 C2 C9 C10
C3 C4 C5 C12 C13
C6 C7 C8 C15 C16
C11
D14
C17
1
3
ReadUnique
Ack
8
Data
2 SnpFwd
5
4 Ack
Sequence Number
6 SnpFwd
7 Data
X Req/Resp/Ack
Req/Resp/Ack
ReadUnique
(a) Near AMO traffic.
C0 C1 C2 C9 C10
C3 C4 C5 C12 C13
C6 C7 C8 C15 C16
C11
D14
C17
1
4
AtomicLoad
SnpResp
3
Resp
2 SnpUniq
5 AtomicLoad
Resp
6
Snoop Message
(b) Centralized AMO traffic.
C0 C1 C2 C9 C10
C3 C4 C5 C12 C13
C6 C7 C8 C15 C16
C11
D14
C17
1
4
AtomicLoad
SnpResp
3
Resp
2 SnpAMO
Line Transfer
SnpResp
(c) Delegated AMO traffic.
Figure 2: Simplified example comparing AMOs under three schemes on a chiplet-based system. Core 6 (C6) performs an AMO
on a cache line owned by Core 9 (C9), tracked by directory 14 (D14). Then, C9 performs another AMO to the same line. (a) With
near AMOs, C6 and C9 ping-pong the line between chiplets. (b) With centralized AMOs, D14 invalidates C9, and then performs
AMOs from C6 and C9. (c) With delegated AMOs, all updates are performed in C6 without requiring invalidations.
setup. Category B shows applications for which centralized AMOs
improve performance compared to a single-chiplet configuration,
but near AMOs perform better. Finally, category C represents cases
where centralized AMOs in the dual-chiplet configuration yield
the best overall performance. Moving from single to dual-chiplet
reduces the suitability of centralized AMOs in four out of six ap-
plications, motivating the need for more efficient AMO execution
strategies in chiplet-based systems.
Although centralized AMOs usually reduce the cost of updates,
they may introduce coherence misses [30, 92] when invalidating
the cache-line owner. Moreover, centralized AMOs cause significant
interconnect traffic because every update must be sent to a shared,
fixed per-line location. Figure 2 illustrates this scenario by showing
the interconnect hops required when a core from a different chiplet
performs a near AMO (Figure 2a) and a centralized AMO (Figure 2b)
on a line currently owned by another core.
This paper introduces two new types of far AMOs, delegated and
migrating AMOs. Delegated AMOs forward the RMW operation to
the cache line owner, who executes it locally without requiring an
invalidation or a cache line transfer. Delegated AMOs effectively
reduce coherence misses by removing superfluous invalidations,
as shown in Figure 2c. Alternatively, migrating AMOs transfer the
cache line ownership to the AMO requester. Integrating centralized,
delegated, and migrating AMOs enables placement decisions at the
directory level through policies, programmer hints, or predictors;
potentially reducing interconnect traffic and overall overhead when
performing AMOs.
Moreover, we find that predicting the best type of far AMO at the
directory level is difficult due to the lack of information available.
Thus, we propose Delegato, a tracing mechanism that effectively
transports reuse information from private caches to the directory.
We demonstrate Delegato’s utility by designing an AMO predictor
that selects the best placement for AMO based on Delegato feed-
back information. This Delegato-based predictor improves AMOs’
performance across multiple well-known benchmarks.
The main contributions of this work are:
• We propose two new types of far AMOs, delegated and mi-
grating, to effectively manage data movement across chiplets.
Both transactions enable far AMOs without requiring an
arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) at the directory.
• We investigate the design space of static policies for far
AMOs at the directory when selecting between centralized,
delegated, and migrating AMOs.
• We propose Delegato, a trace mechanism to enable accurate
predictions at the directory. We design a predictor on top of
Delegato to select the location for executing AMOs.
• We evaluate all proposals using gem5-23 [75]. The Delegato-
based predictor achieves a performance improvement of
1.13× over the state-of-the-art AMO predictor and 1.07×
over centralized AMOs.
2 Background
2.1 AMOs in Modern Systems
AMOs implement atomic RMW primitives (e.g., compare-and-swap,
fetch-and-add, etc.). However, AMOs are known for their low through-
put and high latency, imposing significant overhead and serializa-
tion on parallel applications [56, 57]. Thus, modern systems have
incorporated different mechanisms to execute AMOs efficiently:
Near AMOs: L1D caches perform the RMW operations locally.
Therefore, the cache coherence protocol must enforce that the L1D
cache has exclusive access to the cache line before performing any
update. If other private caches have a copy of the targeted line,
a structure acting as the point-of-coherence of the system, such
as a directory1, sends invalidation messages to all sharers. When
a single private cache owns the line, modern implementations of
cache coherence protocols can efficiently resolve the transaction in
only three hops because the owner sends the cache line directly to
the requester, as shown in Fig. 2a. Future AMOs performed in the
same L1D cache will have reduced latency as long as the requester
holds the exclusive copy of the cache line. Thus, near AMOs are
especially suitable for updating shared data with locality [102].
Nevertheless, near AMOs introduce significant interconnect traffic
because cache ownership moves to the L1D of the updater. This
data movement pattern is especially harmful when there is a long
latency link between the requester and the cache line owner.
Centralized AMOs: The AMOs are sent to the serialization
point using an AtomicLoad or AtomicStore request2 [49], which
performs the RMW at cache line granularity. Typically, the memory
controller, or the directory (our baseline), manages this task. When
a copy of the cache line is in other private caches, the directory must
recover ownership by sending invalidations to the sharers, which
can take up to four hops to complete a request. When the line has
no sharers and the directory also includes a last-level cache (LLC)
1This work assumes a many-core system where accesses are interleaved across multiple
directory structures to enable scalability.
2AtomicLoads return the previous value stored in memory, AtomicStores do not.
2
