Delegato: Locality-Aware Atomic Memory Operations on Chiplets
Víctor Soria-Pardos
victor.soria@bsc.es
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Adrià Armejach
adria.armejach@upc.edu
Univseritat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Tiago Mück
tiago.muck@arm.com
Arm
Darío Suárez Gracia
dario@unizar.es
Universidad de Zaragoza
José A. Joao
jose.joao@arm.com
Arm
Miquel Moretó
miquel.moreto@upc.edu
Univseritat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Abstract
The irruption of chiplet-based architectures has been a game changer,
enabling higher transistor integration and core counts in a single
socket. However, chiplets impose higher and non-uniform memory
access (NUMA) latencies than monolithic integration. This harms
the efficiency of atomic memory operations (AMOs), which are
fundamental to implementing fine-grained synchronization and
concurrent data structures on large systems. AMOs are executed
either near the core (near) or at a remote location within the cache
hierarchy (far). On near AMOs, the core’s private cache fetches the
target cache line in exclusiveness to modify it locally. Near AMOs
cause significant data movement between private caches, especially
harming parallel applications’ performance on chiplet-based archi-
tectures. Alternatively, far AMOs can alleviate the communication
overhead by reducing data movement between processing elements.
However, current multicore architectures only support one type
of far AMO, which sends all updates to a single serialization point
(centralized AMOs).
This work introduces two new types of far AMOs, delegated
and migrating, that execute AMOs remotely without centralizing
updates in a single point of the cache hierarchy. Combining central-
ized, delegated, and migrating AMOs allows the directory to select
the best location to execute AMOs. Moreover, we propose Delegato,
a tracing optimization to effectively transport usage information
from private caches to the directory to predict the best atomic type
to issue accurately. Additionally, we design a simple predictor on
top of Delegato that seamlessly selects the best placement to per-
form AMOs based on the data access pattern and usage activity of
cores. Our evaluation using gem5 shows that Delegato can speed
up applications on average by 1.07× over centralized AMOs and by
1.13× over the state-of-the-art AMO predictor.
1 Introduction
Chiplet-based architectures have surpassed monolithic systems and
system-on-chip (SoC) designs in the semiconductor market [68, 74].
Chip vendors have adopted chiplet-based designs as a cost-effective
alternative for scaling multicores without increasing die size, en-
hancing yield and reducing costs [68, 116]. Compared to monolithic
systems, the main drawback is the introduction of interposers,
which increase the communication latency between chiplets and
© 2025 Owner/Author | ACM. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here
for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was
published in 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25),
October 18–22, 2025, Seoul, Republic of Korea, https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756030.
HIST RSOR BC LULESH BFS SPMV
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Speed-up
A B C
S-Near S-Centralized D-Near D-Centralized
Figure 1: Speed-up of single-chiplet (S) and dual-chiplet (D)
Grace CPU configurations using near and centralized AMOs.
Normalized w.r.t. single-chiplet near AMOs execution time.
NUMA effects [33, 87]. This harms the performance of latency-
sensitive operations such as Atomic Memory Operations (AMOs),
which are extensively used to synchronize parallel workloads.
All modern instruction set architectures (ISAs) feature AMOs to
perform atomic read-modify-write (RMW) operations on memory,
such as Armv9 [49], x86 [53], RISC-V [111], and Nvidia PTX [94].
AMOs are fundamental for updating shared data directly or creating
high-level synchronization mechanisms such as mutually exclusive
locks, barriers, and lock-free data structures. ISAs continuously
extend their AMO support to include more complex primitives,
reducing the programmers’ burden. For instance, x86 has recently
introduced conditional increment AMOs (CMPccXADD) [53], and
Arm has introduced floating-point AMO extensions (LSFE) [51].
AMOs require dedicated support from coherence protocols to
ensure correct cache behavior. Most systems perform AMOs within
the private levels of the cache hierarchy by acquiring exclusive
permission of the targeted cache line, performing the RMW op-
eration locally (near AMOs) [4]. Alternatively, centralized AMOs
send all updates for a cache line to a single designated location,
typically the corresponding directory slice, where the RMW op-
eration is performed remotely [48, 70, 99]. Therefore, centralized
AMOs aggregate updates at the directory, avoiding cache line migra-
tion across multiple private caches [29, 102]. However, centralized
AMOs can trigger invalidations that may cause future data misses.
Figure 1 illustrates the performance impact of near and central-
ized AMOs on six applications running on NVIDIA’s Grace CPU
Superchip [93], evaluated under single-chiplet and dual-chiplet con-
figurations. The two chiplets are interconnected via NVLink, which
offers high bandwidth but incurs significant latency. GCS supports
cross-chiplet atomics, which send AMOs remotely to the directory
where the cache line resides, reducing data movement over NVLink.
In the single-chiplet configuration, centralized AMOs consistently
outperform near AMOs across all benchmarks. However, in dual-
chiplet configurations, we observe three distinct behaviors, labeled
A, B, and C in Figure 1. In category A, centralized AMOs exhibit
lower performance in a dual-chip setup than in a single-chiplet
1
