Note: This paper has been accepted for publication at the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25) and is available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756036

arXiv:2505.04567v3 [cs.AR] 28 Oct 2025

F LEXING RISC-V I NSTRUCTION S UBSET P ROCESSORS TO
E XTREME E DGE

Alireza Raisiardali ∗
Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
400 Cambridge Science Park
Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
araisiardali@pragmaticsemi.com

Konstantinos Iordanou
Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
400 Cambridge Science Park
Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
kiordanou@pragmaticsemi.com

Jedrzej Kufel
Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
400 Cambridge Science Park
Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
jkufel@pragmaticsemi.com

Kowshik Gudimetla
Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
400 Cambridge Science Park
Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
gkowshik@pragmaticsemi.com

Kris Myny
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Computer Security and Industrial Cryptography (COSIC)
Diepenbeek Campus, Wetenschapspark 27 - box 15152
3590 Diepenbeek, Leuven, Belgium
kris.myny@kuleuven.be

Emre Ozer
Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd
400 Cambridge Science Park
Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WH, UK
eozer@pragmaticsemi.com

October 29, 2025

A BSTRACT
This paper presents an automated approach for designing processors that support a subset of the
RISC-V instruction set architecture (ISA) for a new class of applications at Extreme Edge. The
electronics used in extreme edge applications must be area and power-efficient, but also provide
additional qualities, such as low cost, conformability, comfort and sustainability. Flexible electronics,
rather than silicon-based electronics, will be able to meet the above qualities. For this purpose, we
propose a methodology for generating RISC-V instruction subset processors (RISSPs) tailored to
these applications and implementing them as flexible integrated circuits (FlexICs). The methodology
makes verification an integral part of the processor design by treating each instruction in the ISA as a
discrete, fully functional, pre-verified hardware block. It automatically builds a custom processor by
stitching together the instruction hardware blocks required by an application or a set of applications
in a specific domain. We generate RISSPs using the proposed methodology for three extreme edge
applications, and embedded applications from the Embench benchmark suite. When synthesized,
RISSPs can achieve 8-to-43% reduction in area and 3-to-30% reduction in power compared to a
processor supporting the full RISC-V ISA, and are also on average ~40 times more energy efficient
than Serv - the world’s smallest 32-bit RISC-V processor. When physically implemented as FlexICs,
the three extreme edge RISSPs achieve up to 42% area and 21% power savings with respect to the
full RISC-V processor.
Keywords RISC-V · Flexible electronics · FlexIC · Edge Computing
∗

Also affiliated with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven

© 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.

Flexing RISC-V Instruction Subset Processors to Extreme Edge

1

Introduction

A new class of emerging applications requires embedded electronics capable of sensing, computing, and communicating
while also offering qualitative features such as low cost, conformability, comfort, biocompatibility, and sustainability in
addition to low power consumption. This new class of applications is now described as “Extreme Edge” which extends
beyond edge computing today [12].
Extreme edge applications can be classified into two main categories: 1) Short-lived applications that have short
lifetimes. Item-level intelligence, Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) and single-use healthcare products are
examples of short-lived applications. Since electronics are part of the product itself, they will have a short lifetime,
and any firmware/software update to the electronics will not be very likely. For instance, a smart dressing product has
built-in electronics to monitor wound healing conditions. The lifetime of the dressing is in the range of days before it is
replaced. The dressing and its built-in electronics will be disposed. 2) Long-lasting applications that have much longer
lifespan. Smart textile, wearable healthcare and environmental/agriculture monitoring are examples of long-lasting
extreme edge applications. For instance, the electronics embedded into a smart garment can be monitoring the health
status and performance of a person. The garment will be rewashed and reused in a lifespan of several months before it
wears out, and its built-in electronics may receive software/firmware updates during its lifetime. Table 1 summarizes
the application domains and features of these two categories.
Table 1: Classification of extreme edge applications, application domains and distinct characteristics
Category

Short-lived

Domains

Item-level intelligence (e.g., smart
labels), FMCG (e.g., smart
food/drink packaging), Single-use
healthcare (e.g., patches, wound
dressings)

Required Qualitative Features
Application Lifespan
Requirement of Software and
Firmware Updates

Ultra Low-cost, Conformability,
Patient Comfort and Sustainability
Days/Weeks

Long-lasting
Smart textile (e.g., smart garment
and rugs), Wearable healthcare (e.g.,
implantables and ingestibles),
Environmental/agriculture
monitoring (e.g., smart plant
patches)
Low-cost, Conformability,
Biocompatibility and Sustainability
Months/Years

Not likely

Very likely

Conventional silicon-based electronics are unable to meet the requirements of extreme edge applications because they
do not satisfy many of the required features. For example, smart labels in asset tracking and smart packages in FMCG
are ultra cost-sensitive applications where electronics embedded into them must not cost more than a few cents per unit
to ensure economic viability. An electrocardiogram (ECG) patch requires a comfortable and conformable form factor in
electronics for the patient where conventional bulky electronics will cause discomfort. An implantable or ingestible
device must contain electronics that are biocompatible and conformable. The volume of extreme edge products in terms
of units is enormous, measured in a few trillions annually [35, 36, 19, 21]. If electronic devices are embedded into
such volume of products, they must be manufactured in sustainable semiconductor fabs that have a low environmental
footprint.
Flexible electronics [26] is an alternative technology that meets many of the qualities required by extreme edge. The
aim is to produce electronic components that include sensors, compute engines, communication interfaces, batteries
using low-cost printing, and lithography techniques on flexible substrates (e.g., plastic or paper). For example, flexible
integrated circuits (FlexICs) [34] can be fabricated using metal-oxide thin-film transistor technology on a polyimide
wafer, as shown in Figure 1.
The chips are ultra-thin, conformable, bendable and ultra-low cost [31], and the semiconductor fabs that manufacture
FlexICs have significantly lower carbon footprint per FlexIC than an equivalent Si chip [1]. Because the fabrication
process is low-cost and fast, the development of custom FlexICs specifically designed for an application or domain can
be faster and lower in cost than Silicon technology.
The performance requirements of the two extreme edge categories are not demanding where a sensor or an array of
sensors are connected to an analogue frontend to pre-process sensor raw signals that are converted into digital data and
handled by a digital backend to translate them into knowledge. The knowledge is stored and/or directly transmitted to
the external world through a communication interface (e.g., RF). Data sampling rates required by sensors are 200 Hz[6],
2
© 2025 Pragmatic Semiconductor Ltd. This work is made available for non-commercial, academic use only. All rights reserved.

