arXiv:2510.16544v1 [cs.CR] 18 Oct 2025

𝜌Hammer: Reviving RowHammer Attacks on New Architectures
via Prefetching
Weijie Chen

Shan Tang∗

Yulin Tang∗

Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
weijie_chen@hust.edu.cn

Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372164@hust.edu.cn

Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
m202372045@hust.edu.cn

Xiapu Luo

Yinqian Zhang†

Weizhong Qiang‡

The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ.
Hong Kong, China
csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Southern Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Shenzhen, China
yinqianz@acm.org

Huazhong Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Wuhan, China
wzqiang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

CCS Concepts

Rowhammer is a critical vulnerability in dynamic random access
memory (DRAM) that continues to pose a significant threat to
various systems. However, we find that conventional load-based
attacks are becoming highly ineffective on the most recent architectures such as Intel Alder and Raptor Lake. In this paper, we
present 𝜌Hammer, a new Rowhammer framework that systematically overcomes three core challenges impeding attacks on these
new architectures. First, we design an efficient and generic DRAM
address mapping reverse-engineering method that uses selective
pairwise measurements and structured deduction, enabling recovery of complex mappings within seconds on the latest memory
controllers. Second, to break through the activation rate bottleneck
of load-based hammering, we introduce a novel prefetch-based
hammering paradigm that leverages the asynchronous nature of
x86 prefetch instructions and is further enhanced by multi-bank
parallelism to maximize throughput. Third, recognizing that speculative execution causes more severe disorder issues for prefetching,
which cannot be simply mitigated by memory barriers, we develop
a counter-speculation hammering technique using control-flow
obfuscation and optimized NOP-based pseudo-barriers to maintain
prefetch order with minimal overhead. Evaluations across four
latest Intel architectures demonstrate 𝜌Hammer’s breakthrough effectiveness: it induces up to 200K+ additional bit flips within 2-hour
attack pattern fuzzing processes and has a 112× higher flip rate than
the load-based hammering baselines on Comet and Rocket Lake.
Also, we are the first to revive Rowhammer attacks on the latest
Raptor Lake architecture, where baselines completely fail, achieving
stable flip rates of 2,291/min and fast end-to-end exploitation.

• Security and privacy → Hardware attacks and countermeasures; Side-channel analysis and countermeasures.

∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Yinqian Zhang is affiliated with Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous

Systems and the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of SUSTech.
‡ Weizhong Qiang is the corresponding author and affiliated with Jinyinhu Laboratory,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, and Hubei Engineering Research
Center on Big Data Security.

This is the author’s version of the work accepted at the 58th IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’25). The version published by ACM is at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756042.

Keywords
Rowhammer, Prefetching, DRAM Address Mapping, Speculative
Execution, Memory Barrier, Security, Reliability

1

Introduction

Rowhammer is a well-known circuit-level vulnerability within
DRAM that exploits the read disturbance effect to flip the value
stored in memory cells (a.k.a. activation-induced bit flips, AIB [50])
by repeatedly opening and closing their nearby DRAM rows for
sufficient times. Since its first-time discovery [35], this critical issue
has drawn profound attention from both industry and academia for
over a decade. At its core, Rowhammer attack enables the manipulation of memory contents without directly accessing them, which
has proven its potential to compromise a wide range of systems
and application scenarios, such as privilege escalation and model
intelligence degradation [5, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 22, 28, 43, 57, 60, 62–
64, 68, 69, 73, 74], and resulted in significant security implications
on system isolation and trusted computing [21, 23, 53, 55, 70, 71].
Currently, it has been widely acknowledged that the Rowhammer issue would keep exacerbating with the evolution of DDR
standards and the ever-increasing density of DRAM cells [35].
In response, valiant efforts have been made to address this issue [1, 3, 38, 41, 54, 72, 77], with target row refresh (TRR) currently being the most widely implemented defense mechanism in
off-the-shelf DDR4 devices. TRR works by periodically refreshing
a subset of rows being frequently activated, thereby effectively
preventing early Rowhammer strategies that relied on simple patterns like the double-sided hammering (i.e., two aggressor rows
sandwiching one victim row) [42, 48, 49]. Unfortunately, recent
research [14, 18, 29, 30, 37] has demonstrated that the TRR mitigation within DDR4 DRAMs can be effectively bypassed, particularly
through the state-of-the-art non-uniform hammering techniques
that confuse the TRR sampler in identifying the real victim rows.

Weijie Chen, Shan Tang, Yulin Tang, Xiapu Luo, Yinqian Zhang, and Weizhong Qiang

Nonetheless, it seems that Rowhammer attacks have not evolved
to be more potent over time as anticipated. Both this paper and recent literature [30, 33] acknowledge that such attacks are becoming
increasingly difficult to realize on newer platforms. After systematically investigating the four most recent Intel architectures, we
identify the following non-trivial challenges and propose a novel
prefetch-based Rowhammer framework, 𝜌Hammer, which is significantly more effective than conventional load-based attacks and
revives Rowhammer on the latest architectures.
Challenge I: Complex DRAM Address Mappings
A critical prerequisite for launching effective Rowhammer attacks is the ability to reverse-engineer the correct DRAM address
mapping of the target system in order to precisely locate the victim
rows. While numerous techniques [30, 56, 65, 68] have been proposed, they primarily rely on incomplete heuristics that become
impractical as architectural complexity increases. For instance, in
this paper, we identify that the latest Alder/Raptor Lake architectures adopt more intricate mapping schemes with expanded bank
bit ranges and bank function combinations, which is likely in response to their supporting DDR5 with extra bank groups [24, 31].
To overcome these limitations, we present a new layout-agnostic
reverse-engineering methodology that leverages selective pairwise
measurements and structured deduction to accurately and generically recover mappings across architectures. Meanwhile, it also
achieves high efficiency and scalability by addressing the combinatorial explosion issue of prior brute-force-based approaches. Evaluation across our hardware setups demonstrates that our method
recovers complete mappings within 10 seconds while all available
tools completely fail on Alder/Raptor Lake.
Challenge II: Insufficient Activation Rate
One major motivation of ours stems from observing that existing Rowhammer methods, which primarily rely on memory load
instructions (e.g., x86 MOV) for DRAM accesses and memory barrier instructions to maintain their order [8, 9, 14, 19, 27, 29, 30, 33],
are not as effective on newer architectures as originally reported,
especially on the most recent Alder/Raptor Lake platforms where
they consistently fail. A deeper analysis of this paper reveals that
the activation rate of these methods still requires further improvement to make Rowhammer attacks (more) generic and exploitable.
To address this, we introduce a novel prefetch-based hammering
paradigm that leverages the asynchronous and non-blocking characteristics of x86 prefetch instructions to significantly enhance the
hammering throughput. In addition, by combining prefetching with
the multi-bank technique, we are able to amplify our attacks even
further through bank-level parallelism.
Challenge III: Speculative Disorder Hazard of Prefetching
Modern speculative execution mechanisms, particularly out-oforder (OoO) execution and branch prediction, present a significant
challenge to Rowhammer attacks by disrupting the intended instruction order and thereby reducing the overall hammering effectiveness. While both load-based and prefetch-based hammering are
affected by this issue, we find that prefetch instructions exhibit even
more severe disorder, particularly on the latest Alder/Raptor Lake
platforms. Even worse, unlike explicit memory reads, prefetching
performs implicit accesses and cannot be reliably ordered following
the traditional wisdom of using barrier instructions. To overcome
the disorder issue, we develop a counter-speculation hammering

technique that combines runtime control flow obfuscation with
carefully tuned NOP-based pseudo-barriers. This technique mitigates the reordering effects derived from both OoO execution and
branch prediction, restoring more controllable prefetching behavior
that unlocks the potential of prefetch-based hammering.
Our evaluation demonstrates a substantial leap in attack effectiveness with 𝜌Hammer compared to the conventional load-based
Rowhammer baselines. During our large-scale 2-hour fuzzing processes, we observe a maximum of over 200K additional bit flips
on Comet Lake alone. Even on newer Alder/Raptor Lake platforms where the baseline fails to produce any meaningful bit flips,
𝜌Hammer consistently induces thousands. Moreover, repeated attack simulations across diverse physical locations reveal 𝜌Hammer’s
high stability and practicality: 𝜌Hammer achieves sustained flip
rates of 187K/min and 47K/min on Comet/Rocket Lake, representing
112.4x and 47.1x improvements over the baseline. On Alder/Raptor
Lake, it further maintains highly practical rates of 995/min and
2,291/min, while the baseline could reproduce none.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a generic and efficient DRAM address mapping
reverse-engineering method that uese structured pairwise
measurements without any prior knowledge and assumptions about the mapping pattern, achieving full mapping
recovery within 10 seconds across all tested recent platforms.
• We introduce a novel prefetch-based Rowhammer attack
paradigm that significantly boosts activation rate by leveraging the asynchronous nature of prefetch instructions,
further enhanced by combining it with multi-bank parallelism.
• We develop a counter-speculation hammering technique
that mitigates the intensified disorder effects of OoO execution and branch prediction, enabling more effective
prefetch-based Rowhammer on the latest architectures.
• We open-source our implementation on Github at https:
//github.com/rhohammer/rhohammer and evaluate our attack on four recent Intel architectures and show that it
achieves orders-of-magnitude higher in bit flip counts and
flip rates compared to load-based baselines, including Alder
and Raptor Lake platforms where baselines consistently
fail.
Responsible Disclosure. We have reported potential security
impact of 𝜌Hammer to related parties, including Intel, MSI, and
Samsung. The PSIRT of both Intel and MSI have been actively
collaborating with us to investigate and address the issue. The MSI
PSIRT promptly released a fix addressing the issue.

2 Background
2.1 Dynamic Random Access Memory
DRAM is a volatile memory technology widely equipped as the
main memory in modern computers, which is usually available on
the market in the form of dual inline memory modules (DIMM).
Figure 1 shows an overview of the DRAM organization. A DIMM
communicates with the memory controller (MC) through one of the
channels and has chips on one or both sides (i.e., single/dual-rank).
Each channel operates independently, while each rank processes

