arXiv:2405.05529v5 [cs.NI] 9 Feb 2025

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions
with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness
Shaofeng Wu∗

Qiang Su∗

sfwu22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

jacksonsq97@gmail.com
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

Zhixiong Niu

Hong Xu

zhniu@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China

hongxu@cuhk.edu.hk
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
Network function (NF) offloading on SmartNICs has been
widely used in modern data centers, offering benefits in host
resource saving and programmability. Co-running NFs on
the same SmartNICs can cause performance interference due
to contention of onboard resources. To meet performance
SLAs while ensuring efficient resource management, operators need mechanisms to predict NF performance under
such contention. However, existing solutions lack SmartNICspecific knowledge and exhibit limited traffic awareness,
leading to poor accuracy for on-NIC NFs.
This paper proposes Yala, a novel performance predictive
system for on-NIC NFs. Yala builds upon the key observation
that co-located NFs contend for multiple resources, including onboard accelerators and the memory subsystem. It also
facilitates traffic awareness according to the behaviors of
individual resources to maintain accuracy as the external
traffic attributes vary. Evaluation using BlueField-2 SmartNICs shows that Yala improves the prediction accuracy by
78.8% and reduces SLA violations by 92.2% compared to stateof-the-art approaches, and enables new practical usecases.
CCS Concepts: • Networks → Network performance
modeling; • Hardware → Networking hardware.
Keywords: Network Function, SmartNIC, Resource Contention, Performance Prediction

1

Introduction

SmartNICs have been prevalent in modern data centers to
deploy diverse network functions (NF) due to their benefits
in programmability and host resource saving [37, 42, 44, 45,
47, 55, 57, 59, 65]. They typically integrate heterogeneous
onboard resources, such as SoC cores and domain-specific
hardware accelerators, to cater to various NF demands. Moreover, vendors are developing increasingly resourceful NICs
to meet evolving offloading needs [9, 12, 62]. To fully leverage
∗ Equal contribution. The work was done when Qiang was with City University of Hong Kong.

these resources, it is common practice to co-locate multiple
NFs on the same NIC [36, 42, 47, 60].
Unfortunately, sharing SmartNIC resources among colocated NFs may lead to contention and performance degradation, posing challenges in maintaining the SLAs. One potential solution is to implement stringent resource isolation
mechanisms on SmartNICs. Yet, previous work on this front
requires specific NIC hardware architecture support and substantial rewriting of NF programs to accommodate new isolation abstractions [36, 39], thus limiting their practical deployment. Consequently, developers still need extensive handtuning to ensure simultaneous SLA fulfillment for co-located
NFs, which is time-consuming and error-prone [36, 41, 47].
Ideally, if operators can predict the performance drop an
NF will suffer before actually co-running it with other NFs
on the same NIC, they can make better resource management decisions on existing infrastructure and NF implementations. Concretely, SmartNIC platforms [40, 42, 47, 60] and
SmartNIC-assisted clouds [2, 16, 29] can maximize NF colocations in SmartNIC offloading while minimizing SLA violations, which correspond to lower total cost of ownership
(TCO) for providers and better experience for tenants, and
enjoy faster diagnosis and reasoning of on-NIC NF performance compared to slow manual analysis [37, 55]. To achieve
these, we need a systematic on-NIC NF performance prediction framework, which entails two new challenges.
First, on-NIC NFs often utilize diverse onboard resources
including memory and various hardware accelerators, making it common that contentions occur across heterogeneous
resources. Prior work on NF performance prediction has primarily focused on memory subsystem contention as the sole
source of performance interference for on-server NFs [33,
48, 50]. We showcase that the state-of-the-art SLOMO [48]
encounters high prediction errors when co-locating NFs contend for both memory and regex accelerator on a BlueField-2
SmartNIC, with ∼20% in the median and ∼60% in the worst
case (§2.2.1). The community lacks a clear understanding of
(1) the impact of contention on individual domain-specific
accelerators and (2) the overall effect of multi-resource contention on performance.

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

Network Function

Accelerator

FlowStats [48, 55]
IPRouter [48, 55]
IPTunnel [34]
NAT [40, 47, 55]
FlowMonitor [47, 53]
NIDS [47, 48]
IPComp Gateway [13, 61]
ACL [18, 40]
FlowClassifier [18, 68]
FlowTracker [3]
PacketFilter [3]

None
None
None
None
Regex
Regex
Regex, compression
None
None
None
Regex

T Framework
Click
Click
Click
Click
Click
Click
Click
DPDK
DPDK
DOCA
DOCA

Table 1. Typical NFs and accelerators they require from SmartNICs.
Common resources (CPU, memory, and NIC subsystems) are not
shown. T means that the NF performance heavily depends on the
traffic attributes. The regex-based NFs use the same rule set from [5].
The last column indicates the programming framework we use to
implement each NF.

Second, NF performance is heavily influenced by traffic
attributes such as flow counts and payload features, which
change dynamically for each NF. Current frameworks often
either assume fixed traffic attributes [37, 55], or can only
deal with a limited range of variations in these attributes
(e.g., 20% in flow counts in [48]).
In this paper, we propose Yala, a new performance prediction framework that explicitly considers multi-resource contention and dynamic traffic attributes. Yala conducts offline
profiling of on-NIC NFs to collect their performance under diverse synthetic contention levels and traffic attributes. Leveraging these profiles, Yala trains a contention- and trafficaware model for each NF, which is then used to predict the
NF’s performance before its deployment, facilitating placement and other management decisions. We build Yala for
SoC SmartNICs due to their ease of programmability (e.g.,
DPDK and Click support), and tackle the above technical
challenges by leveraging critical characteristics of on-NIC
NFs.
Multi-resource contention modeling. Yala’s key idea here
is to independently model individual resource contention and
integrate these per-resource models together. We identify
hardware accelerators and memory subsystems as primary
sources of contention for on-NIC NFs. For accelerators, we
find that it is a common design for NFs to interact with
them through their own queues which are coordinated by
round-robin scheduling. This inspires us to take a white-box
approach and propose a queueing-based contention model.
Memory subsystem contention can be modeled using a blackbox ensemble-based ML model following existing work [48].
Then, to capture the end-to-end effect of each resource, we
introduce execution-pattern-based composition. This makes
intuitive sense because how each resource and its contention
affects the overall performance critically depends on whether
NF runs as a pipeline or in a run-to-completion fashion.

Traffic-aware modeling. On top of multi-resource contention, Yala employs traffic-aware augmentation to integrate
knowledge of traffic attributes into per-resource models. Generally speaking, this can be done by feeding traffic attributes,
e.g., flow count and packet size, as additional features to
per-resource models. Specifically, for accelerators, we can
leverage the white-box nature of the queueing-based model
and represent key model parameters as a function of traffic attributes; for memory subsystem which has a blackbox
model, we simply fuse traffic attributes with performance
counters as features to extend the model. In addition, to curb
the high profiling cost caused by the introduction of traffic attributes especially for black-box memory models, Yala
adopts adaptive profiling to prune attribute dimensions and
enforce targeted sampling at performance-critical ranges of
the attributes.
We implement Yala in C and Python, leveraging typical
offline profiling tools [19, 20, 24, 26] and sklearn [25], and
evaluate it on 9 common NFs using BlueField-2 SmartNIC.
Our code is open source anonymously at [28]. Our testbed
evaluation shows that Yala achieves accurate NF throughput
predictions under multi-resource contention and varying
traffic attributes, with an average error of 3.7% across NFs
which corresponds to 78.8% improvements compared to stateof-the-art SLOMO. As new usecases, we also illustrate that in
NF placement, Yala can reduce SLA violations by 88.5% and
92.2% compared to greedy approaches [47, 60] and SLOMO,
and in performance diagnosis it can deliver higher accuracy
in identifying bottlenecks for on-NIC NFs.

2

Background and Motivation

We start by presenting the brief background of network
function resource contention on SmartNICs, followed by the
unique challenges of developing a contention-aware performance prediction framework.
2.1

Background

SmartNICs have been widely used to offload various network
functions (NFs) in modern data centers, mainly for their benefits in host resource saving and energy efficiency [35, 42, 44,
47, 55, 60]. The NFs leverage the onboard domain-specific
hardware accelerators to achieve high throughput and low
latency [40, 47, 48, 55]. We showcase some typical NFs seen
across prior work [40, 47, 48, 55] and the types of resources
they need in Table 1. Here Flow Monitor, NIDS, and PacketFilter require the regex accelerator for packet inspection
and payload scanning, and IPComp Gateway requires both
the regex and compression accelerators.
Contention degrades performance Recently, co-running
multiple NFs on the same SmartNIC has become more common to improve utilization [36, 42, 47, 60]. This can lead
to performance degradation due to contention for shared
resources. To demonstrate this effect, we profile the throughput drop of 9 typical NFs from Table 1 when they co-locate

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

Tput Drop(%)

80
Median
95%ile
99%ile

60
40
20
0

ts

Sta

w
Flo

T
NA

l

ne

un
IPT

r
s
ute low- r NID
F nito
Mo

o
IPR

CL
wFlo cker A
Tra

w- r
Flo sifie
s
a
Cl

Figure 1. Throughput drop ratios of some NFs from Table 1 under
resource contention when co-located with at most 3 other random
NFs.

with other NFs. For each target NF, up to three other NFs
are randomly selected (from Table 1)1 . Each NF is given
two dedicated cores while sharing the memory subsystem
and hardware accelerators due to the lack of hardware- or
system-level isolation support on current SmartNICs. Traffic
profiles for all NFs consisted of 16K flows of 1500B packets,
with flow sizes following the uniform distribution (further
details in §7.1). For NFs processing payloads with regular
expressions, we use exrex [15] to generate packet payloads.
Note the packet arrival rates are set sufficiently high for all
NFs to ensure it is not causing throughput drop. We measure
the throughput drop ratio against the baseline when the target NF runs alone with two CPU cores, the entire memory
and hardware accelerators. Figure 1 depicts the statistics of
throughput drop ratios. We can see that when co-running
with different (numbers and combinations of) NFs, resource
contention can cause 4.2% to 62.2% throughput drop at the
95%ile, and 1.9% to 10.6% at the median.
2.2

Challenges

Modeling and predicting NF performance under resource
contention is therefore of paramount importance for many
management tasks [33, 37, 48, 50], and some prior work [33,
48, 50] has investigated this problem in network function
virtualization where NFs run on commodity servers. An
immediate question is, what makes contention-aware performance prediction different in the context of SmartNICs?
We now highlight two unique challenges which are not well
addressed in past efforts. Note all experiments in this section
use the BlueField-2 (BF-2) SmartNIC.
2.2.1 Multi-Resource Contention We’ve seen that NFs
on SmartNIC utilizes multiple heterogeneous onboard resources. Prior work, however, has only considered contention
of the memory subsystems [33, 48, 50], missing the contention on other hardware accelerators. Their effectiveness
as a result is tainted in the context of SmartNICs.
To empirically substantiate our argument, we co-run FlowMonitor with up to three competing NFs chosen randomly
1 Some NFs require minimum two cores, while one BlueField-2 has eight

cores in total.

from Table 1 on one BF-2. The traffic profiles are identical
to the one in Figure 1. We use SLOMO [48] as the state-ofthe-art memory-based prediction model and develop a new
model for the regex accelerator due to lack of existing models
(details in §4.1.1).
We first train our single-resource models for FlowMonitor
which uses regex accelerator in addition to CPU and memory, and validate their effectiveness under single-resource
contention. We build two synthetic NFs, mem-bench and
regex-bench2 , to assert controllable memory and regex contention, respectively, for generating training data (details in
§6). Following SLOMO, we also collect data from our BF-2’s
performance counters at runtime (e.g., memory read/write
rates) as the model input. Absolute percentage error against
FlowMonitor’s true throughput under single-resource contention is used as the comparing metric. Our models achieve
the same <10% average prediction error for memory- and
regex-only contention as reported in the SLOMO paper [48].
Then we apply these models directly to the multi-resource
contention scenario as said before, where co-locating NFs as
a whole contend for both memory and regex accelerator and
nothing else. Figure 2(a) shows that prediction error now
increases to ∼20% in the median and reaches ∼60% in the
worst case, indicating that only considering one resource is
wildly inaccurate.
In addition, NFs exhibit diverse execution patterns when
utilizing these resources. For example, one NF may run in
a pipeline manner for high throughput, while another may
wait for the completion of dispatched requests to ensure
low average latency (run-to-completion) [24, 37]. This makes
composition of single-resource models, a strawman solution
for multi-resource prediction, inaccurate.
To explore this, we analyze two simple composition approaches: (1) sum composition, which adds up the predicted
throughput loss from each model [37, 67], and (2) min composition, which uses the maximum predicted throughput
loss as the final output [47, 58]. Figure 2(b) presents the
results of these two approaches in the same setting as Figure 2(a). We observe that while composition models reduce
error, they do not guarantee optimal accuracy across all NFs.
For NF1 with run-to-completion, sum composition works
better, but its error is significant (∼17%) for the pipeline NF2.
The key reason is that the resource contention impact on
end-to-end throughput varies by NF execution patterns. In
pipeline-based NFs, throughput is constrained by the slowest
stage on which resource contention causes the most significant performance interference compared. In contrast, for
2We build synthetic NFs for three main purposes: 1) collecting training data,

2) exploring insights that support our design choices, and 3) microbenchmarks. For example, regex-bench is purpose-built to have negligible memory
subsystem usage but extensive regex accelerator usage, and we rely on it
to investigate the contention behavior in regex accelerator (§4.1.1). For
evaluations on end-to-end accuracy (§7.2, §7.3, §7.4) and use cases (§7.5),
we employ real NFs from Table 1 instead.

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

40

16.8

30
20
10

20
0

0
(a)

27.4

12.4

12.4

16.2

5.5

NF 1

9.9
4.6

(b)

8K flows

1.0

0.8
25

NF 2

run-to-completion NFs, contention on different resources
uniformly impacts the end-to-end throughput.
To quickly recap, NFs on SmartNICs can experience contention across multiple resources, and its impact on performance differs according to the execution patterns. Current
systems consider only single-resource contention, which
results in substantial prediction inaccuracies.
2.2.2 Traffic Attributes An NF’s performance also depends on certain traffic attributes, such as number of flows,
payload characteristics, etc., in many cases [37, 48, 55]. To
see this, we measure FlowStat’s throughput when co-located
with mem-bench, and vary mem-bench’s cache access rates
(CAR). Figure 3(a) shows that FlowStat’s throughput drops
differently in different traffic profiles as mem-bench’s CAR
increases, implying that a traffic-agnostic model inevitably
leads to high prediction errors when adapting to new traffic
profiles.
Figure 3(b) empirically confirms the intuition above for
existing work. Here we look at three target NFs: FlowStats,
FlowClassifier, and FlowTracker. Each of them is co-located
with mem-bench on a single BF-2. We use the same default
traffic profiles of 16K flows to train three models for each
target NF following SLOMO just as in the experiments before. We then test them under changing traffic attributes by
generating 100 distinct traffic profiles with random number
of flows up to 500K. It is clear from Figure 3(b) that prediction error increases dramatically when the traffic behavior
deviates from the default profiles that the models have seen.
Note SLOMO does consider the number of flows in its prediction, but can only handle a small degree of deviation from
the training data as we shall detail in §7.1 and §7.4.

Yala Overview

The challenges in §2 pose two fundamental questions on accurate performance prediction for on-NIC NFs, which drive
Yala’s design:

80

16K flows

1.2

0.8

Figure 2. Prediction errors (absolute percentage error) of FlowMonitor’s throughput using single-resource models. (a) Box and
whisker plot of using only the memory-based SLOMO model or a
regex-based model (§4.1.1). We show the median error on top of
each error box. (b) Mean average percentage error (MAPE) of sum
and min composition of single-resource models. NF1 and NF2 adopt
run-to-completion and pipeline resource usage pattern respectively.

3

4K flows

Prediction Error(%)

18.7

60

Memory Only
Regex Only
Linear
Min

Tput (Mpps)

80

1.4

40

Memory Only
Regex Only

MAPE (%)

Prediction Error(%)

100

50
75
100
Competing CAR (Mref/s)
(a)

42.4

Default Profile
Other Profiles

60

18.0

40
12.8

20
0

0.9

0.5

1.1

Stats
Flow

Flow er
sifi
Clas
(b)

Flow r
e
Track

Figure 3. (a) FlowStats’s throughput when the competitor’s cache
access rate (CAR) changes in three distinct traffic profiles. CAR
is the sum of the cache read and write rates obtained from the
hardware performance counters on BlueField-2. (b) Distribution
of prediction errors after adapting the model to different traffic
profiles. We show the median error on top of each error box.

1. How to model the impact of multi-resource contention
on NF performance?
2. How to integrate traffic attributes to contention-aware
performance prediction models?
We develop Yala, a framework for accurately predicting
on-NIC NF performance with multi-resource contention and
varying traffic profiles. To address the first design question, Yala adopts a “divide-and-compose” approach: it builds
up individual per-resource contention models (§4.1) for both
hardware accelerators and memory subsystem to separately
model their impact on throughput, and applies executionpattern-based composition (§4.2) to faithfully capture the endto-end effect of contention. Then in response to the second
design question, Yala introduces traffic-aware augmentation
(§5.1) techniques to integrate various traffic attributes into
per-resource models, and develops an adaptive profiling (§5.2)
method to balance the soaring profiling costs (due to the extra dimensions of traffic attributes) with model quality. Taken
together, during online prediction, Yala takes the contention
level of competing NFs and traffic attributes of the target
NF as input to the per-resource models and compose the
results based on NF’s execution pattern to obtain the final
prediction. Consistent with prior work [37, 48, 50], Yala does
not require knowledge of or access to NF source code.

4

Multi-Resource Contention Modeling

We now present the design insights and details of Yala’s
multi-resource contention modeling. Note we are interested
in the NF’s maximum throughput assuming the arrival rate
is high enough, which represents the NF’s capability and is
consistent with prior work [48, 50, 55].
4.1

Per-Resource Models

An on-NIC NF consumes onboard CPU, memory subsystem (cache and main memory), hardware accelerators, and
NIC [36, 37, 41, 55]. For CPU, given common deployment
practice [61, 63, 68], we perform core-level isolation for colocated NFs so CPU contention does not happen. Although

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

4.1.1 Hardware Accelerators At first glance, modeling
hardware accelerator contention seems not much different
from existing design for memory contention [48, 50]. That
is, one can use an accelerator’s performance counters to
quantify NF’s contention level as the input, and employ an
ML model to predict throughput. This is infeasible, however, because current SmartNIC accelerators do not expose
fine-grained performance counters [8, 10, 20, 23, 45]. We
thus propose a general queue-based white-box approach for
hardware accelerators.
Contention behavior in hardware accelerators. We start
by analyzing the accelerator’s contention behavior which
our modeling is based upon. Without loss of generality, we
use the widely-used regex accelerator [3, 10, 24] as the target
of discussion hereafter.
In practice, NFs utilize onboard accelerators via the corresponding queue systems [3, 4]. For example, an NF establishes request queues and enqueues/dequeues operations
to/from a regex accelerator [3, 4, 24]. This queue-based interface unifies the interaction with specialized accelerators and
applies to many SmartNICs [8, 9, 12] and beyond [11, 38].
Understanding the queue system behavior is then crucial for
modeling accelerator contention.
Setup. We write a synthetic Click NF called regex-NF that
utilizes regex accelerator to scan packet payloads. regexNF’s packet arrival rate is high enough to ensure maximum
throughput, and it is tested with different match-to-byte
ratios (MTBR).3 To vary contention level, we adjust the corunning regex-bench’s arrival rate.
Observation. We depict the throughput results in Figure 4 and
make two interesting observations. O1: First, regex-NF shows
linear throughput drop as the contention from regex-bench
rises. O2: Second, regex-NF finally reaches the equilibrium
throughput without further dropping. The equilibrium point
clearly varies with regex-bench’s MTBR.
These two observations are very familiar to us as they
point to the canonical round-robin (RR) queuing discipline
widely used in practice. Indeed, we confirm from [7] that
our regex accelerator driver’s implementation adopts RR for
queue-level fairness. With one queue per each NF which is
3 Match-to-byte-ratio (MTBR) refers to how many matches against a regex

ruleset is contained in each byte of the payload. A higher MTBR reflects more
regex matches with in each unit of packet payload and longer processing
time for a packet (§7.1).

140

regex-NF
regex-bench

120
Tput (Mpps)

some prior work has discussed potential isolation issues for
NICs on a server [41], we do not encounter this problem as
on-NIC NFs leverage powerful hardware-based flow table
on SmartNICs [27]. Thus, we focus on contention on hardware accelerators and memory subsystem here, assuming
fixed traffic attributes. Notice the per-resource modeling effectively derives the NF’s throughput on one given resource
only without accounting for other resources, and may not
equal to the overall throughput.

100
80

regex-NF MTBR:
194 matches/MB
220 matches/MB
417 matches/MB
628 matches/MB

60
40
20
0
0

5

10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Arrival Rate of regex-bench Request (Mpps)

50

Figure 4. Throughput of co-running synthetic pattern-matching
“regex-NF” and regex-bench as a function of arrival rate of regexbench. In each setting, regex-NF and regex-bench reach an equilibrium throughput, e.g., , with MTBR of 194 maches/MB for regex-NF,
they both obtain 48.9 Mpps at equilibrium.

the setup in our experiment, as regex-bench’s request arrival
rate increases, regex-NF’s requests have proportionally less
access to the accelerator, resulting in the linear throughput
decline. When contention is high enough that regex-bench’s
queue is always non-empty when the RR scheduler turns to
it, throughput of regex-NF stops dropping since its average
sojourn time (sum of queuing and processing times) stops
increasing [52]. As they have the same numbers of queues,
their equilibrium throughput is the same as seen in Figure 4.
Our approach. Motivated by the above analysis, the regex
accelerator contention can be modeled by RR over multiple
request queues with one service node (i.e., the accelerator).
Suppose we have 𝑁 NFs sharing an accelerator, and each 𝑁 𝐹 𝑗
has 𝑛 𝑗 request queues. At equilibrium, the average sojourn
Í
time 𝑡 of requests from each queue is [52]: 𝑡 = 𝑁𝑗=1 𝑛 𝑗 𝑡 𝑗 ,
where 𝑡 𝑗 represents 𝑁 𝐹 𝑗 ’s average request processing time.
For a target 𝑁 𝐹𝑖 , its throughput 𝑇𝑖 can be represented as the
sum of throughput of all its queues, i.e.,
𝑇𝑖 =

𝑛𝑖
𝑛𝑖
𝑛𝑖
=
,
=
𝑁
𝑁
𝑡
∑︁
∑︁ 𝑛 2𝑗
𝑛𝑗𝑡𝑗
𝑇
𝑗=1
𝑗=1 𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜

(1)

where 𝑇 𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜 represents its regex processing throughput (in
pps) when 𝑁 𝐹 𝑗 runs solo. Clearly when 𝑛𝑖 = 𝑛 for all NFs,
they have the same (equilibrium) throughput 𝑇𝑖 .
Now to use Equation (1) for a new NF, we need to infer 𝑛 𝑗
and 𝑇 𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜 without any knowledge of the NF. Recall 𝑇 𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜
is throughput on the regex accelerator only, which may or
may not equal to end-to-end throughput if the NF is bottlenecked on other resources or follows run-to-completion. So
to estimate them accurately, we again co-run the NF with
regex-bench and set regex-bench’s request processing time
and match rate to be high enough to ensure that at equilibrium, the NF spends most of its time on regex. We then
collect two sets of equilibrium throughput data to solve for
𝑛 𝑗 and 𝑇 𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜 since regex-bench’s parameters are known.

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

4.1.2 Memory Subsystem Memory subsystem contention
has been studied in existing work [33, 48, 50] which finds
that the contention-induced throughput drop can be modeled as a piece-wise linear function of performance counters.
Thus we follow SLOMO’s gradient boosting regression (GBR)
method which is state-of-the-art, using 7 performance counters as input features. Note that we overcome the fixed-traffic
limitation of GBR by integrating traffic attributes to it in §5.
4.2

Execution-Pattern-Based Composition

We now discuss how to composite the per-resource models
for deriving end-to-end throughput.
Observations. We analyze two typical execution patterns of
NFs: pipeline and run-to-completion [24, 37]. In the following
discussion, we define a stage as a processing block that will
only utilize one resource type. Considering a packet received
by a pipeline NF, or p-NF, and a run-to-completion NF, or
r-NF: for p-NF, the packet waits at the first stage until its
predecessor enters the second stage; for r-NF, the packet
waits until the predecessor leaves the last stage.
Figure 5 presents the throughput of a synthetic p-NF (top)
and r-NF (bottom) under different levels of memory and
regex accelerator contention. We observe that: O1. the pNF’s throughput stays unchanged when memory contention
is low and regex contention is high. For example, the throughput stays at ∼400 Kpps when competing cache access rate
(CAR) is less than ∼100 Mref/s and competing match rate
(product of throughput and MTBR) is 2500 Kmatches/s. This
is because the throughput of a pipeline equals that of its
slowest stage — regex matching in this case, making it insensitive to memory subsystem contention. O2: Second, for the
r-NF, we observe that throughput drop is a monotonically
decreasing function of both competing CAR and regex match
rate, indicating that throughput drop is always caused by
the compounded contention.
Our approach. The main goal here is to derive a composing
function that takes in execution pattern and per-resource
throughput drop Δ𝑇𝑘 , 1 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑟 (given by per-resource
models) as input, and produces the end-to-end throughput
drop caused by contention in 𝑟 resources.
Pipeline: Based on O1, end-to-end throughput (denoted as
𝑇 ) of a p-NF can be calculated as:
𝑇 = 𝑇𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜 − max(Δ𝑇1, ..., Δ𝑇𝑟 ),

(2)

where 𝑇𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜 is the NF’s throughput when running solo.
Run-to-completion: Based on O2, we denote the processing
time of a packet in each resource without contention as 𝑡𝑘

450

0 KMatch(es)/s
520 KMatch(es)/s
2340 KMatch(es)/s
2500 KMatch(es)/s
2600 KMatch(es)/s

420
390
360
Tput (Kpps)

We verify Equation (1) with empirical results of various
regex-based NFs, which show that our approach is accurate
with 1.3% error on average.
Other accelerators. Our approach here directly applies to
other hardware accelerators, e.g., compression and crypto
accelerator, which also uses round-robin based queues[13,
22].

330
195

0 KMatch(es)/s
520 KMatch(es)/s
2600 KMatch(es)/s

180
165
150
135
30

57

84

111
138
165
192
Competing CAR (Mref/s)

219

246

Figure 5. Throughput of two synthetic Click NFs that use pipeline
(top) and run-to-completion (bottom) as a function of competing
CAR in memory subsystem and match rate in regex accelerator.

(also the sojourn time), where 1 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑟 . Due to multiresource contention, the sojourn time of a packet in each
resource grows by Δ𝑡𝑘 as a result of throughput drop Δ𝑇𝑘 .
Therefore, the throughput of the r-NF can be represented as:

𝑇 =

1
𝑟
∑︁

(𝑡𝑘 + Δ𝑡𝑘 )

𝑘=1

=

1

=

1

𝑟
𝑟
𝑟
𝑟
∑︁
∑︁
©
ª ∑︁ ∑︁
𝑡𝑘 ® −
𝑡𝑘
­𝑡 𝑗 + Δ𝑡 𝑗 +
𝑗=1 «
𝑗=1 𝑘=1,𝑘≠𝑗
𝑘=1,𝑘≠𝑗 ¬

.
𝑟
∑︁

1
𝑟 −1
−
𝑇
−
Δ𝑇
𝑇𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜
𝑗
𝑗=1 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜

(3)
Detecting execution pattern. Without source code access,
we resort to a simple testing procedure to detect an NF’s
execution pattern. We co-run the NF with our benchmark
NFs, and see if Equation 2 or 3 fits its throughput drop better.
One may also observe the NF’s throughput curve similar to
Figure 5 to empirically determine if it is a p- or r-NF.

5

Traffic-Aware Prediction

Our discussion so far has been limited to fixed NF traffic
profiles. Now we discuss how to integrate traffic attributes
into our models.
5.1

Traffic-Aware Augmentation

It is obvious that we need to augment the per-resource model
with knowledge of traffic attributes, while execution-patternbased composition is not affected. To do this, we select three
common traffic attributes that impact NF performance based
on our experiment results and previous studies [37, 48]: number of flows or flow count, packet size, and match-to-byteratio (MTBR) of a packet. We denote a traffic profile of 16K
flows, 1500B packets and 600 matches/MB payload using a
vector (16000, 1500, 600).

WSS:

1.2

Normalized Tput

Tput (Mpps)

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

0.5 MB
5 MB
10 MB

1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0

10

20

30 40 50
# of Flows (K)
(a)

60

70

Packet Size:

64 B
128 B

256 B
512 B

1024 B

1
0.5
0

0.5
5
10
Competing WSS (MB)
(b)

Figure 6. Throughput of FlowStats as a function of traffic attributes.
(a) The packet size is 1500 B. (b) The number of flows is 16 K.

5.1.1 Hardware Accelerators We again start with hardware accelerators, specifically the regex accelerator, as a
concrete example.
Our approach. A regex-utilizing NF is naturally sensitive
to the MTBR of packet payload [24].4 It directly impacts the
average processing time of the regex requests.
Following notations from Equation 1, the average request
processing time of 𝑁 𝐹 𝑗 for a given ruleset can be expressed
1
as: 𝑡 𝑗 = 𝑇𝑗,𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑜
= 𝑡 𝑗,0 + 𝑎 𝑗 𝑚 𝑗 , where 𝑡 𝑗,0 and 𝑎 𝑗 are constants,
and 𝑚 𝑗 is the MTBR. This equation builds on the intuition
that that request processing time grows linearly with number
of matches in a packet, as each match induces a constant
amount of extra processing time on average on top of the
base processing time. Plugging into Equation 1, the trafficaware throughput model of regex accelerator is:
𝑛𝑖
.
𝑇𝑖 = Í𝑁 2
(4)
𝑛 (𝑡 + 𝑎 𝑚 )
𝑗=1

𝑗

𝑗,0

𝑗

𝑗

The parameters 𝑡 𝑗,0, 𝑎 𝑗 can be easily obtained from linear
regression using data from co-running the NF with regexbench under different MTBRs.
Other accelerators. Per-resource models for other accelerators can be augmented in a similar two-step approach: (1)
analyzing what accelerator-specific traffic attributes affect
the NF; (2) representing the average processing time as a
function of these accelerator-specific traffic attributes.
5.1.2 Memory Subsystem We co-run FlowStats with membench with different numbers of flows (other traffic attributes
stay the same). We adjust the working set size of mem-bench
and keep other metrics (i.e., CAR and memory access rate)
fixed. Figure 6(a) reveals that FlowStats experiences significant throughput drop with increasing flow count. More interestingly, the throughput curve is also a piece-wise function of
the number of flows, which is similar to memory contention
modeling as mentioned in §4.1.2 (we shall explain this in
§5.2 later). Thus, we take a straight-forward approach to add
traffic attribute knowledge as extra features to the blackbox
GBR model of memory subsystem, by appending the traffic
attributes vector to the original input vector of performance
counters.
4 Number of queues is fixed during NF’s life cycle per its configuration.

5.2

Adaptive Profiling

Being traffic-aware brings a new and critical issue: training a
traffic-aware model now needs more data due to the higher
dimensionality of the input vector compared to a fixed-traffic
model. This is especially true for the black-box model for
memory subsystem, which already has a high-dimensional
input vector. A naive solution is to repeat the collection
process for each unique traffic profile (a.k.a. full profiling),
which obviously leads to massive exponentially-growing
profiling overheads. Although random sampling based profiling [48, 50] can effectively reduce overhead, it may cause
high prediction error due to inadequate coverage of the data
space. The trade-off between profiling cost and model accuracy motivates us to design an optimized profiling method
for Yala.
Observations. Our design has roots on two key observations. First, an NF’s performance is only dependent on a few
traffic attributes. For example, FlowStats is only sensitive to
number of flows as in Figure 6(a), but not packet size as in
Figure 6(b), since it only processes packet header.
Second, for a given traffic attribute, it causes significant
performance drops only in a limited range of values; performance shows little changes in other ranges. Still using
FlowStats, when the competing WSS is 10MB, its throughput
loses ∼30% for [1, 20𝐾] flows, but remains almost unchanged
for [40, 60𝐾] flows as in Figure 6(a). This is because FlowStats’s hash table grows as a result of growing flow count.
Before it fully occupies the last level cache (LLC), increasing
the hash table size leads to higher cache miss ratio, which
slows down read/write operations and thus throughput. After the LLC is saturated, cache miss ratio stays at a fixed level,
causing NFs to exhibit constant throughput. These characteristics also hold in general across NFs as we empirically
observe for other NFs in Table 1. This is because generally,
(1) NFs typically process either packet headers or payloads,
which only depends on several traffic attributes; and (2) traffic attributes usually affect performance by changing the size
of key data structures in the NF processing logic, e.g., the
mapping table in NAT [34, 48, 50], which exhibits the same
LLC effect as explained just now.
Our approach. Our key idea is to prune irrelevant traffic
attribute dimensions, and conduct more sampling for relevant traffic attributes within the critical value ranges where
NF performance has salient changes. We propose a two-step
adaptive profiling algorithm that balances between model
accuracy and profiling cost.
As shown in Algorithm 1, we first test whether NF performance is sensitive to a traffic attribute or not. Suppose
the possible range of an attribute 𝑓 is [𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 ]. We profile the NF’s solo throughput with 𝑓 set to 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥
respectively while other attributes remain default (lines 8-9).
Then we compare the throughput difference to determine
if 𝑓 should be added in our model. Note that the function

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

Algorithm 1 Adaptive profiling.
1: 𝑛𝑓 : The target NF to be profiled
2: C: The list of performance counters
3: F : The list of traffic attributes
4: 𝑞, 𝜖0 , 𝜖1 , 𝑚 are hyperparameters
5: function adaptive_profile(𝑛𝑓 , C, F )
6:
𝑛←0
7:
for 𝑓 in F do
8:
𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 ← profile_one(𝑛𝑓 , 0, 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑛)
9:
𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 ← profile_one(𝑁 𝐹 , 0, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑛) ⊲ "0" represents

no contention. 𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 represent the lowest and highest
possible value of 𝑓 respectively.
10:
if |𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 | < 𝜖0 then
11:
F ← F − {𝑓 }
⊲ Prune the traffic attribute.
12:
range_profile(𝑛𝑓 , F𝑚𝑖𝑛 , F𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑛)
⊲ F𝑚𝑖𝑛 and F𝑚𝑎𝑥
mean all traffic attributes take the lowest and highest possible
value respectively.
13:
return
14: function range_profile(𝑛𝑓 , F𝑚𝑖𝑛 , F𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑛)
15:
𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 ← profile_one(𝑛𝑓 , 0, F𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑛)
16:
𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 ← profile_one(𝑛𝑓 , 0, F𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑛)
17:
if 𝑛 ≥ 𝑞 then
⊲ We reach profiling quota.
18:
return
19:
if |𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 | ≥ 𝜖1 then
20:
F𝑚𝑖𝑑 ← F𝑚𝑎𝑥 2+F𝑚𝑖𝑛
21:
for _ in 𝑚 do
22:
C𝑟 ← random() ⊲ Choose a random contention
level to apply on target NF.
23:
profile_one(𝑛𝑓 , C𝑟 , F𝑚𝑖𝑑 , 𝑛)
24:
range_profile(𝑛𝑓 , F𝑚𝑖𝑑 , F𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑛)
25:
range_profile(𝑛𝑓 , F𝑚𝑖𝑛 , F𝑚𝑖𝑑 , 𝑛)
26:
return

Synthetic benchmarking NFs. We implement three synthetic NFs called mem-bench, regex-bench and compressionbench (∼8300 LoCs in C with DPDK support) based on opensource benchmark tools [4, 19, 24, 26] to apply configurable
levels of contention on memory subsystem, regex, and compression accelerators, respectively.
Network functions. We implement common on-NIC NFs
with ∼3600 LoCs in C and Click using frameworks including
Click 2.1 [34], DPDK 20.11.6 [18], and DOCA 1.5-LTS [3].
Our BF-2 enables hardware flow table offloading for NFs.

7

We present our evaluation of Yala now. The highlights are:
(1) Accuracy: Yala achieves an average prediction error of 3.7% end-to-end, with 78.8% error reduction
compared to state-of-the-art across NFs (§7.2). Microbenchmarks further show that Yala’s design choices
on multi-resource contentions and changing traffic
attributes are effective (§7.3, §7.4).
(2) Usecases: To see how Yala can be beneficial in practice, we show two concrete usecases where it (1) facilitates resource-efficient placement decisions in NF
scheduling, reducing NF SLA violations by 88.5% and
92.2% compared to the classical greedy-based approaches
and SLOMO, and (2) enables fast performance diagnosis for NFs under contention with 100% accuracy
(§7.5).
(3) Overhead: Yala’s offline adaptive profiling reduces
profiling cost while maintaining high model accuracy
(§7.6).
7.1

profile_one() collects throughput data under a specified
configuration (contention level and traffic attribute), and increments the total number of collected samples by one if the
configuration has not been profiled. After pruning the attribute list, we carry out a binary search to adaptively collect
profiling data. For each call to range_profile(), we consider
the difference between solo throughputs on traffic attribute
boundaries. If their difference exceeds a certain threshold, we
collect 𝑚 data points at the center of current traffic attribute
region (lines 18-22), Then the traffic attribute region is split
in half, which will serve as the new region for the recursive
call of range_profile().

6

Implementation

We implement Yala with ∼1600 LoCs in C and Python. Yala
employs perf-tools [20] and a working set size estimation
tool [1] to collect performance counters. Yala uses sklearn [25]
to construct machine learning models used in per-resource
models. Our code is open source anonymously at [28].

Evaluation

Methodology

We employ NVIDIA BlueField-2 (BF-2) to evaluate Yala. A
BF-2 SmartNIC has 8 ARMv8 A72 cores at 2.5GHz, 6MB L3
cache, 16GB DDR4 DRAM, dual ConnectX-6 100GbE ports,
and hardware accelerators for regex and compression. The
NF traffic is generated from a client machine with an AMD
EPYC-7542 CPU with 32 cores at 2.9GHz and a ConnectX-6
100GbE NIC. Both the BF-2 server and client machine are
connected to a Mellanox SN2700 switch.
Traffic profiles. We employ DPDK-Pktgen [21] to create
various traffic profiles with different attributes, i.e., number
of flows and packet sizes. In addition, we generate packet
payloads using exrex [15] with diverse MTBR of conducting
regular expression matches for NFs using regex accelerator.
The rule sets are from [5].
Baseline. SLOMO [48] serves as our baseline. For each NF,
we train a model using SLOMO’s gradient boost regression under the default traffic profile, which has 16K flows,
1500B packet size, and the MTBR at 600 matches/MB. If in
testing the traffic profile deviates from default, we employ

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

SLOMO

Yala

SLOMO

ACL
NIDS
IPTunnel
IPRouter
FlowClassifier
FlowTracker
FlowStats
FlowMonitor
NAT

Yala

NF
MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

1.3
16.2
62.9
4.2
7.5
4.9
11.7
40.9
8.2

100.0
24.3
70.5
68.4
28.1
56.1
33.3
31.1
38.6

100.0
74.3
73.1
98.2
73.7
86.0
57.9
41.9
49.1

1.2
1.5
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.9
4.3
4.5
6.4

100.0
95.9
75.6
66.7
63.2
61.4
70.2
62.2
42.1

100.0
100.0
92.3
100.0
100.0
100.0
96.5
93.2
80.7

Table 2. Prediction accuracy comparison under both multi-resource
contention and varying traffic attributes. On average Yala reduces
MAPE by 78.8% compared to SLOMO, at 3.7% and 17.5%, respectively. Unless otherwise stated, rows of table are sorted in ascending
order of Yala’s MAPE.

NIDS
FlowMonitor

MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

21.4
49.3

60.0
18.5

71.2
33.3

4.3
5.1

55.6
59.3

95.6
88.9

Table 3. Prediction accuracy of SLOMO and Yala when the NF runs
under only multi-resource contention. Traffic profile is fixed to the
default one.
Prediction Error(%)

NF

80
60

(a)

Yala
SLOMO

24.4

40
20
10

2.9

2.5

6.0

Low

High

SLOMO’s sensitivity extrapolation5 to adapt the model (Section 6 in [48]). We validate that our models achieve the same
level of prediction error as in [48].
Metrics. We report mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) [30,
48, 50] as the main metric of prediction accuracy. We also
report ±5% Acc. and ±10% Acc. to avoid the impact of test
set size variations [67].
7.2

60
50
40
30
20
10
5

(b)
Yala
SLOMO
SLOMO (w/o extrapolation)
3.8 12.6
4.8
3.6
Low

13.4
10.9

High
Traffic Pattern Deviation

Overall Accuracy

We first evaluate the overall prediction accuracy of Yala under multi-resource contention and varying traffic attributes.
Each target NF is co-located with up to three other NFs and
we numerate all possible combinations of NFs. We also apply
9 distinct traffic profiles for each NF. The results are aggregated under all traffic profiles, as shown in Table 2. We can
see that Yala averagely exhibits 3.7% MAPE, 70.8% ±5% Acc.
and 95.9% ±10% Acc., compared to SLOMO’s 17.5% MAPE,
50.0% ±5% Acc. and 72.7% ±10% Acc., demonstrating Yala’s
superior prediction accuracy. Specifically, Yala has the most
significant gains for IPTunnel, FlowMonitor, FlowStats, and
NIDS that use multiple resources and/or is sensitive to traffic attributes. Meanwhile, Yala achieves the same accuracy
as SLOMO for ACL because it is very lightweight and insensitive to traffic attributes. Note that the high prediction
accuracy for such NFs is aligned with that from previous
studies [33, 48, 50].
Next, we microbenchmark Yala’s major design choices to
better understand the benefits they each bring.
7.3

Prediction Error(%)

Regex Contention

Deep-Dive: Multi-Resource Contention

First we look at how Yala’s per-resource modeling and composition approach handles multi-resource contention. We fix
the traffic profile to be the default in this section to isolate
its impact. We choose FlowMonitor and NIDS that utilize
multiple resources, and co-run each with mem-bench and
5“Sensitivity” refers to NF performance as a function of contention level for

simplicity [33, 48–50].

Figure 7. The distribution (box and whisker plot) of the absolute
percentage errors of (a) multi-resource contention with different
regex contention levels, and (b) memory-only contention with different ranges of variations in the flow count. We show the value of
median error in both figures.

regex-bench with varying contention levels. Table 3 presents
the comparison. We can observe that Yala reduces the MAPE
by 44.2% and 17.1% for FlowMonitor and NIDS, respectively,
To better analyze the source of accuracy gains, we zoom in
on FlowMonitor and vary the regex contention level it receives in two ranges: low range (MTBR ≤ 600 matches/MB),
and high range (MTBR > 600 matches/MB). Figure 7(a) depicts the distribution of the absolute percentage errors. Yala
maintains low errors as contention rises with median errors
consistently below 6.0%. With low contention, SLOMO also
achieves high accuracy with median error at 2.5%, because
in this case multi-resource contention effectively reduces to
single-resource (memory for FlowMonitor) contention. Here
Yala’s error is actually slightly higher that SLOMO, because
SLOMO enjoys the same amount of training data as Yala
but concentrate on one fixed traffic profile. During high
contention, SLOMO’s inability to model contention on these
two resources simultaneously lead to high median errors at
24.4%.
To further evaluate the use of Yala’s composition design
based on execution pattern (§4.2), we write two synthetic
NFs, NF1 and NF2, with NF1 using memory and regex, while
NF2 adds the compression accelerator. Each has both a pipeline

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

SLOMO

MAPE (%)
NF

NF1
NF2

pipeline
run-to-completion
pipeline
run-to-completion

sum

min

Yala

9.8
8.7
21.9
14.6

0.7
12.4
1.8
7.6

0.7
1.3
1.8
1.6

Table 4. Prediction error of different multi-resource composition
approaches for different execution patterns.

and run-to-completion version. We compare Yala to the simple sum and min composition (recall §2.2.1), where they use
the same per-resource models trained specifically for NF1
and NF2. As shown in Table 4, Yala attains the best accuracy
across all cases and resource usage patterns, with MAPE
lower than 2%. This gain essentially comes from properly
modeling NF’s execution pattern to capture the end-to-end
impact of multi-resource contention.
7.4

Yala

NF

Pattern

Deep-Dive: Traffic Attributes

We now move to examine Yala’s design on traffic-aware
modeling. We choose traffic-sensitive NFs and co-run each
with mem-bench on a single BF-2. Since SLOMO only considers memory contention, we set a fixed contention level
in memory, exclude other resource contention, and generate
100 traffic profiles by randomly changing number of flows,
packet size, and MTBR when applicable for each NF. Table 5
shows the results aggregated from all profiles. Again Yala attains superior accuracy over SLOMO across the board, with
over 90% in ±10% Acc. and <5% MAPE for most NFs.
We then zoom into one particular attribute, flow count,
which SLOMO also specifically models. We vary the flow
count between training and testing across two ranges: low
range where it changes by at most 20%, and high range
(>20%). Figure 7(b) displays the distribution of absolute percentage error in this case. Yala maintains low errors consistently, with a median at 4.7%, highlighting the benefits
of our traffic-aware modeling (§5). Under low-range variations, SLOMO exhibits high accuracy with sensitivity extrapolation [48]. However, as traffic profiles undergo more
significant changes, SLOMO suffers from high prediction
errors, with 13.4% at the median. This is consistent with [48]:
the extrapolation only works when the NF’s sensitivity profile in training has enough overlap with that under testing
traffic [48], which corresponds to low range profiles here.

MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

MAPE
(%)

±5%
Acc.(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

2.5
10.4
9.5
4.0
9.5
11.9
88.0

90.0
52.0
28.0
70.0
44.0
20.0
24.0

100.0
66.0
64.0
92.0
66.0
44.0
52.0

1.1
2.9
3.1
3.5
4.7
4.8
5.6

98.0
80.0
82.0
74.0
72.0
62.0
80.0

100.0
100.0
96.0
96.0
92.0
88.0
94.0

NIDS
FlowClassifier
NAT
FlowTracker
FlowStats
FlowMonitor
IPTunnel

Table 5. Prediction accuracy of SLOMO and Yala when target NF
runs under memory-only contention and dynamic traffic profiles.
Approach

Resource Wastage (%)

SLA Violations (%)

Monopolization
Greedy
SLOMO
Yala

196.3
19.0
-21.8
0.5

0
16.5
24.4
1.9

Table 6. Yala’s usecase in contention-aware scheduling compared
to other baseline strategies. SLOMO’s negative resource overhead
stems from erroneous placements compared to the optimal deployment.

We now illustrate Yala’s practical benefits through two use
cases: (1) It enables contention-aware scheduling of NFs to
improve resource utilization; (2) it facilitates performance
diagnosis for NFs with dynamic traffic.

SLA here is defined as the maximum allowed throughput
drop relative to the baseline when the NF runs solo. Given
that the offline version of this problem is NP-complete binpacking [32, 66], we follow previous works [48, 63, 69] and
consider online heuristics that deploy the NFs one by one.
Specifically, we compare the following strategies: (1) Monopolization, which forbids co-location of NFs; (2) Greedy,
which places an NF onto the SmartNIC with most available
resources [47, 60]; (3) Contention-aware, which first predicts
the performance of all NFs on a SmartNIC if the current NF
gets deployed onto this SmartNIC, and then deploys the NF
onto the SmartNIC if no SLA violation is predicted. Both Yala
and SLOMO can provide such contention-aware predictions.
A new SmartNIC is added to the cluster when there is no
feasible placement.
Table 6 compares the above strategies over 100 random
sequences of 500 NF arrivals each. Each NF is assigned the
default traffic profile, and its SLA is set to 5-20% throughput
drop. We examine resource wastage, i.e., how many additional NICs are used against the optimal plan found by exhaustive search, and the corresponding SLA violations. We
observe that Yala minimizes resource wastage to merely 0.5%
and reduces SLA violations by 88.5% and 92.2% over Greedy
and SLOMO on average. The near-optimal performance of
Yala illustrates its potential in coordinating NF scheduling
in a real-world scenario.

7.5.1 Contention-Aware Scheduling We consider the
scenario in which the operator places the NFs as they arrive
to a group of SmartNICs to maximize resource utilization
(i.e., minimize SmartNICs used) while maintaining their SLAs.

7.5.2 Performance Diagnosis In practice, performance
diagnosis has important values as it allows programmers
to systematically explore the design spaces, identify performance bottlenecks and optimization opportunities, and even

7.5

Yala Use Cases

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

Full

Random

Adaptive

P.C.: 3200×

P.C.: 1×

P.C.: 1×

Correctness (%)
NF
NF

Yala

100.0
38.7
29.3

100.0
100.0
100.0

Table 7. Percentage of correct identifications of performance bottleneck using SLOMO and Yala.

provide early-stage insights/guidances on next-generation
SmartNIC [48, 51]. Here we show another usecase of Yala in
diagnosing performance bottlenecks in NFs with dynamic
traffic, when the bottleneck may shift across resources.
As Table 7 shows we deploy FlowStats, FlowMonitor, and
IPComp Gateway that all use regex accelerator. We co-run
each of them with mem-bench and regex-bench and adjust
the MTBR from 0 to 1100 matches/MB while keeping memory contention levels unchanged, and manually analyze the
actual its performance bottleneck using the hotspot analysis function of perf-tools [20]. This is the ground truth.
We then calculate the percentage of correct identification
of bottleneck using our prediction models. We can see Yala
accurately identifies bottleneck for all three NFs with its
multi-resource performance modeling, while SLOMO only
works for FlowStats, as it is always bottlenecked on memory.
FlowMonitor and IPComp Gateway’s bottleneck actually
shifts with traffic. For example, we observe that FlowMonitor’s bottleneck is memory with MTBR at 80 matches/MB,
but changes to regex with MTBR at 1000 matches/MB (default traffic profile). Thus this usecase demonstrates Yala’s
capability in pinpointing NF bottlenecks with dynamic traffic.
7.6

Adaptive Profiling

Lastly we examine the adaptive profiling design of Yala. We
select traffic-sensitive NFs from Table 1, and train them using
three different approaches — full profiling, random profiling,
and adaptive profiling (§5.2). For random profiling and Yala’s
adaptive profiling, we set the same number of training data
points (a.k.a. profiling quota) to ensure a fair comparison. For
full profiling, we use 80% of the profiled data for training, and
the remaining 20% for testing. Profiling cost is represented
by the number of training data samples normalized against
adaptive/random profiling’s quota. We observe from Table 8
that Yala’s adaptive profiling offers comparable accuracy to
full profiling which uses 3200× more data6 . Compared to
random, adaptive profiling significantly enhances accuracy
within the same profiling quota. We further show the benefit
of adaptive profiling using FlowClassifier as an example in
Figure 8. We adopt the same setting as Table 8 but change
6 This is because we use 16 values for packet sizes and 200 values for the

number of flows in full profiling. For each (packet size, number of flows) tuple, full profiling repeats profiling over a set of random memory contention
levels.

MAPE
(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

MAPE
(%)

±10%
Acc.(%)

MAPE
Acc.(%)

±10%
(%)

2.3
2.9
3.4
4.5
5.3
5.3

100.0
98.0
96.0
86.0
90.0
98.0

14.4
9.6
38.9
12.3
9.8
8.5

28.0
62.0
0.0
42.0
68.0
82.0

2.9
3.1
3.4
4.8
4.9
5.9

100.0
96.0
86.0
88.0
90.0
96.0

FlowClassifier
NAT
FlowTracker
FlowMonitor
FlowStats
IPTunnel

Table 8. Profiling cost and model accuracy using full, random and
Yala’s adaptive profiling. P.C. refers to profiling cost.

20
MAPE(%)

Flowstats
FlowMonitor
IPComp Gateway

SLOMO

15
10
5
0

14.4

14.2
5.0

0.5x

Full
Random
Adaptive

14.0

2.9

2.4

1x
1.5x
Profiling Cost

2.3

3200x

Figure 8. Prediction error on FlowClassfier using full, random and
Yala’s adaptive profiling. We change the profiling quota of random
and adaptive profiling to 0.5× and 1.5× of that used in Table 8.

the profiling quota to 0.5× and 1.5×. Figure 8 reveals that by
increasing current profiling quota by 50% (still ∼2100× less
than the profiling cost of full profiling), adaptive profiling
achieve similar error compared to full profiling, at 2.4% and
2.3%, respectively, while random profiling does not exhibit
accuracy improvement since performance-significant ranges
of traffic attribute is still not covered in the training data.
Time cost of profiling. As discussed in §4, Yala requires
offline profiling for each NF to build per-resource models
and identify the execution pattern. This process primarily
involves the collection of: (1) the contention level of synthetic
benchmark NFs (mem-bench, etc.), and (2) the contention
level and sensitivity profiles of the target NF. Across our
experiments, we find that on average 1.6 hours and 0.5 hours
for each, respectively. These time investments are acceptable
since profiling is a one-time effort.

8

Discussion

We discuss a few issues one may have regarding Yala.
What if the configuration of an NF changes? It is possible that an NF’s configuration is adjusted for various reasons,
e.g. adjusting ACL rules in a Firewall NF to apply new policies. Such changes can cause performance characteristics to
change, making the existing model inaccurate. To make Yala
“configuration-aware”, one may adopt a similar approach of
traffic attributes, i.e., extracting “configuration attributes” for
an NF and integrating it into the per-resource models. We
leave this as future work.

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

SLOMO

Yala

NF

Framework
MAPE ±5%
±10% MAPE ±5%
±10%
(%) Acc.(%) Acc.(%) (%) Acc.(%) Acc.(%)

Firewall

18.4

58.7

64.7

0.9

100.0

100.0

Table 9. Prediction accuracy of SLOMO and Yala when target NF
runs under memory-only contention and dynamic traffic profiles
on Pensando SmartNIC.

Contention- Multi- Traffic- Sourcecodeaware
resource aware
agnostic

Clara [55]
LogNIC [37]
BubbleUp [50]
SLOMO [48]
Yala
Table 10. NF performance prediction frameworks. “Sourcecodeagnostic” means the framework does not require NF’s source code.
SLOMO only considers 20% variation in flow counts so it is considered “half” traffic-aware.

Can Yala be generalized to other SmartNICs? Yala can
be generalized to other SoC SmartNICs due to the similar
architecture of their hardware accelerators and memory subsystem. To quickly validate such generalizability, we collect
data and train performance models of a Firewall NF [29]
running on an AMD Pensando SmartNIC [12]. The NF conducts a flow walk on hardware flow table and updates entry
metadata upon matching against flows in the input traffic. As
shown in Table 9, the average prediction error of Yala is 0.9%,
which is 17.5% lower compared to that of SLOMO. This result
reflects that applying Yala to other SoC SmartNICs is feasible.
However, for SmartNICs like on-path SmartNICs whose architecture significantly deviates from SoC SmartNICs, more
investigation is needed into the contention behavior of their
specialized hardware resources [56, 64].
Can Yala adapt to system-wide state changes that affect the maximum performance of NFs? Yala predicts the
maximum throughput of co-located NFs to ensure they conform to SLA under multi-tenancy. However, SmartNICs may
experience system-wide state changes due to various reasons,
altering the maximum throughput of NFs. A typical example
is dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) [14, 43],
which may affect the NF’s maximum performance due to
CPU frequency down-scale or up-scale. Different DVFS policies can be enabled by setting the frequency scaling governor
of CPUs on servers, which is however not supported on common SoC SmartNICs currently, e.g. the SmartNICs we use in
our experiments (Nvidia Bluefield-2 and AMD Pensando) [6].
If we are to extend Yala to predict maximum performance of
on-NIC NFs on future generations of SmartNICs that support
DVFS and other similar system-wide state changes, related
variables, e.g. OS policy and thermal state for DVFS, should
be integrated in our models to ensure high accuracy under
different system states, e.g. power state in DVFS.

9

Related Work

NF performance modeling. There have been extensive
efforts on modeling NF performance. We compare Yala with
past frameworks in Table 10. Yala is, to our knowledge,
the first contention-aware framework that explicitly models
multi-resource contention and traffic attributes.

Isolation. Resource isolation techniques have been explored
to provide performance guarantees of co-running applications [31, 36, 39, 41, 54, 63]. For example, FairNIC [36] proposes isolation solutions for SmartNIC accelerators. PARTIES [31] and ResQ [63] leverages off-the-shelf isolation
techniques, e.g., Intel CAT [17] to enable QoS-aware resource
partitioning. However, these efforts are either inapplicable
to SmartNICs, or provide only partial isolation, or require
substantial rewriting of NFs.
SmartNIC-accelerated NFV. NFV platforms have been
leveraging SmartNICs to improve energy efficiency and enable host resource-saving [29, 40, 42, 46, 47]. For example,
E3 [47] builds a SmartNIC-accelerated microservice execution platform with high energy efficiency. Yala is complementary to them as it can assist operators to make better
runtime decisions, thus improving resource utilization and
reducing SLA violations.

10

Conclusion

Prior contention-aware performance prediction frameworks
fail to accurately predict the performance of on-NIC NFs
due to multi-resource contention and changing traffic profiles. We systematically analyze multi-resource contention
characteristics on SmartNIC as well as the impact of traffic attributes on performance of on-NIC NFs. Our insights enable
the design of Yala, a multi-resource contention-aware and
traffic-aware performance prediction framework for on-NIC
NFs. Yala achieves accurate performance predictions, with
3.7% prediction error and 78.8% accuracy improvement on
average compared to prior works, and enables new usecases.

A

Artifact Appendix

A.1

Abstract

This artifact contains source code and related tools for Yala,
a multi-resource contention- and traffic-aware performance
prediction framework for on-NIC NFs. Yala is publicly available on Github [28]. Specifically, we provide source code
of model training and prediction. Example profiles of an
NF (FlowMonitor) can be used to train its models and produce predictions on its throughput for demonstration. In
addition, we open-source the benchmark NFs (mem-bench,

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

regex-bench and compression-bench), real NFs, NF framework (a modified version of Click), rulesets and related tools
mentioned in our paper.
A.2

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Compilation: We provide python scripts for training and
prediction, which do not require a compiler. Compiling
Click and NFs requires gcc [34]. Compiling rulesets requires RXP compiler. Makefiles are provided for compilation.
• Binary: We provide python scripts for training and prediction instead of binaries. Some binaries of related tools are
included, e.g., compiled ruleset.
• Model: Gradient boosting regression and linear regression
from sklearn [25].
• Hardware: We use NVIDIA BlueField-2 MBF2H332A-AENOT
SmartNIC [8]. The performance counters in Table 11 can be
accessed on this SmartNIC.
• Publicly available?: Yes, on https://github.com/NetX-lab/
Yala
• Code licenses?: BSD 3-Clause "New" or "Revised" License.
• Archived?: Yes, on https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14051092
Counter

Definition

IPC
IRT
L2CRD
L2CWR
MEMRD
MEMWR
WSS

Instructions per cycle.
Instruction retired.
L2 data cache read access.
L2 data cache write access.
Data memory read access.
Data memory write access.
Working set size.

Table 11. Performance counters for training the per-resource model
of memory subsystem.

A.3

Description

A.3.1 How to access Yala is publicly available on Github:
https://github.com/NetX-lab/Yala.
A.3.2 Hardware dependencies We profile NFs on NVIDIA
BlueField-2 MBF2H332A-AENOT SmartNIC. The traffic generator uses another ConnectX-6 100GbE NIC. The training
and prediction do not have specific hardware requirements.
A.3.3 Software dependencies Dependencies of the software are listed as below:
• Training and prediction
– Python: 3.8
– scikit-learn [25]: 0.24.2
– numpy: 1.19.5
– pandas: 1.1.5
– tabulate: 0.9.0
• Traffic generator
– DPDK-Pktgen [21]: 23.03.1
• NF frameworks
– Click [34]: 2.1
– DPDK [4]: MLNX_DPDK_20.11.6

– DOCA[3]: 1.5.0-LTS
A.4

Installation and Testing

For installation of hardware and software dependencies,
please follow our official guide on Github. The training and
prediction of Yala can be tested upon satisfying software
dependencies.
We provide an example of training and using the model
to predict throughput for FlowMonitor. To train Yala using
example training set, please go to /model directory and run
python3 train.py command. This generates a models.pkl
file containing linear model, memory-only model (SLOMO),
regex-only model and Yala’s model for FlowMonitor as an
example. Then to evaluate the model accuracy on the example test set, run python3 predict.py command. This
reports MAPE, ±5% Acc. and ±10% Acc of the four models
mentioned.
A.5

Other Notes

Detailed instructions on using open-sourced tools, e.g., benchmark NFs, can be found in "additional tips" on our Github.
A.6

Methodology

Submission, reviewing and badging methodology:
• https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-reviewand-badging-current
• https://cTuning.org/ae

Shaofeng Wu, Qiang Su, Zhixiong Niu, and Hong Xu

References
[1] Working set size estimation. https://www.brendangregg.com/wss.
html, 2019.
[2] AWS Lambda. https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/, 2023.
[3] DOCA documentation v1.5.0 LTS. https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/
archive/doca-v1.5.0/, 2023.
[4] DPDK. https://www.dpdk.org, 2023.
[5] L7-Filter. https://l7-filter.sourceforge.net/, 2023.
[6] Mellanox bfscripts. https://github.com/Mellanox/bfscripts/blob/
master/bfcpu-freq, 2023.
[7] Mlx-regex. https://github.com/Mellanox/mlx-regex, 2023.
[8] NVIDIA Bluefield-2 DPU.
https://resources.nvidia.com/enus-accelerated-networking-resource-library/bluefield-2-dpudatasheet, 2023.
[9] NVIDIA Bluefield-3 DPU. https://www.nvidia.com/content/dam/enzz/Solutions/Data-Center/documents/datasheet-nvidia-bluefield-3dpu.pdf, 2023.
[10] NVIDIA developer forums. https://forums.developer.nvidia.com/t/
performance-counters-for-accelerators/247086, 2023.
[11] RDMA active queue pair operations.
https://docs.nvidia.com/
networking/display/rdmaawareprogrammingv17/rdma+active+
queue+pair+operations, 2023.
https://www.amd.com/en/
[12] AMD Pensando DPU Accelerators.
products/accelerators/pensando.html, 2024.
[13] The (de)compression accelerator on NVIDIA BlueField-2 SmartNIC. https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/bluefieldbsp480/
compression+acceleration, 2024.
[14] Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling. https://developer.arm.com/
documentation/100960/0100/Dynamic-Voltage-and-FrequencyScaling, 2024.
[15] EXREX. https://github.com/asciimoo/exrex, 2024.
[16] Google Cloud. https://cloud.google.com/, 2024.
[17] Intel CAT. https://github.com/intel/intel-cmt-cat, 2024.
[18] Internet protocol (IP) pipeline application. https://doc.dpdk.org/
guides20.11/sample_app_ug/ip_pipeline.html, 2024.
[19] Memory bandwidth benchmark. https://github.com/raas/mbw, 2024.
[20] Perf-tools. https://github.com/brendangregg/perf-tools, 2024.
[21] The Pktgen application. https://pktgen-dpdk.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/, 2024.
[22] The public key accelerator on NVIDIA BlueField-2 SmartNIC.
https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/bluefieldbsp480/public+
key+acceleration, 2024.
[23] The RegEx accelerator on NVIDIA BlueField-2 SmartNIC.
https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/bluefielddpuosv398/
regex+acceleration, 2024.
[24] RXPbench.
https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/archive/docav1.5.0/rxpbench/index.html, 2024.
[25] Scikit-learn. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html, 2024.
[26] Stress-ng. https://github.com/ColinIanKing/stress-ng, 2024.
[27] Using Open vSwitch with DPDK. https://docs.openvswitch.org/en/
latest/howto/dpdk/, 2024.
[28] Yala. https://github.com/NetX-lab/Yala, 2024.
[29] Deepak Bansal, Gerald DeGrace, Rishabh Tewari, Michal Zygmunt,
James Grantham, Silvano Gai, Mario Baldi, Krishna Doddapaneni,
Arun Selvarajan, Arunkumar Arumugam, Balakrishnan Raman, Avijit
Gupta, Sachin Jain, Deven Jagasia, Evan Langlais, Pranjal Srivastava,
Rishiraj Hazarika, Neeraj Motwani, Soumya Tiwari, Stewart Grant,
Ranveer Chandra, and Srikanth Kandula. Disaggregating stateful
network functions. In Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2023.
[30] Quan Chen, Hailong Yang, Minyi Guo, Ram Srivatsa Kannan, Jason
Mars, and Lingjia Tang. Prophet: Precise QoS prediction on nonpreemptive accelerators to improve utilization in warehouse-scale
computers. In Proc. ACM ASPLOS, 2017.

[31] Shuang Chen, Christina Delimitrou, and José F. Martínez. PARTIES:
QoS-aware resource partitioning for multiple interactive services. In
Proc. ACM ASPLOS, 2019.
[32] E. G. Coffman, M. R. Garey, and D. S. Johnson. Approximation Algorithms for Bin Packing: A Survey, page 46–93. PWS Publishing Co.,
USA, 1996.
[33] Mihai Dobrescu, Katerina Argyraki, and Sylvia Ratnasamy. Toward
predictable performance in software packet-processing platforms. In
Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2012.
[34] Kohler Eddie, Morris Robert, Chen Benjie, Jannotti John, and
Kaashoek M. Frans. The click modular router. ACM Transactions
on Computer Systems, 18(3):263–297, 2000.
[35] Daniel Firestone, Andrew Putnam, Sambhrama Mundkur, Derek
Chiou, Alireza Dabagh, Mike Andrewartha, Hari Angepat, Vivek
Bhanu, Adrian Caulfield, Eric Chung, Harish Kumar Chandrappa,
Somesh Chaturmohta, Matt Humphrey, Jack Lavier, Norman Lam,
Fengfen Liu, Kalin Ovtcharov, Jitu Padhye, Gautham Popuri, Shachar
Raindel, Tejas Sapre, Mark Shaw, Gabriel Silva, Madhan Sivakumar,
Nisheeth Srivastava, Anshuman Verma, Qasim Zuhair, Deepak Bansal,
Doug Burger, Kushagra Vaid, David A. Maltz, and Albert Greenberg.
Azure Accelerated Networking: SmartNICs in the public cloud. In
Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2018.
[36] Stewart Grant, Anil Yelam, Maxwell Bland, and Alex C. Snoeren. SmartNIC performance isolation with FairNIC: Programmable networking
for the cloud. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2020.
[37] Zerui Guo, Jia-Jen Lin, Daehyeok Kim, Michael Swift, Aditya Akella,
Ming Liu, and Yuebin Bai. LogNIC: A high-level performance model
for SmartNICs. In Proc. IEEE/ACM MICRO, 2023.
[38] Anuj Kalia, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Anderson. Design guidelines for high performance RDMA systems. In Proc. USENIX ATC,
2016.
[39] Mikhail Khalilov, Marcin Chrapek, Siyuan Shen, Alessandro Vezzu,
Thomas Benz, Salvatore Di Girolamo, Timo Schneider, Daniele De
Sensi, Luca Benini, and Torsten Hoefler. OSMOSIS: Enabling multitenancy in datacenter SmartNICs. In Proc. USENIX ATC, 2024.
[40] Daehyeok Kim, Vyas Sekar, and Srinivasan Seshan. ExoPlane: An
operating system for on-rack switch resource augmentation. In
Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2023.
[41] Praveen Kumar, Nandita Dukkipati, Nathan Lewis, Yi Cui, Yaogong
Wang, Chonggang Li, Valas Valancius, Jake Adriaens, Steve Gribble,
Nate Foster, and Amin Vahdat. PicNIC: Predictable virtualized NIC.
In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2019.
[42] Yanfang Le, Hyunseok Chang, Sarit Mukherjee, Limin Wang, Aditya
Akella, Michael M. Swift, and T. V. Lakshman. UNO: Uniflying host
and smart NIC offload for flexible packet processing. In Proc. ACM
SoCC, 2017.
[43] Etienne Le Sueur and Gernot Heiser. Dynamic voltage and frequency
scaling: The laws of diminishing returns. In Proc. USENIX HotPower,
2010.
[44] Bojie Li, Kun Tan, Layong (Larry) Luo, Yanqing Peng, Renqian Luo,
Ningyi Xu, Yongqiang Xiong, Peng Cheng, and Enhong Chen. ClickNP:
Highly flexible and high performance network processing with reconfigurable hardware. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2016.
[45] Jianshen Liu, Carlos Maltzahn, Craig Ulmer, and Matthew Leon Curry.
Performance characteristics of the BlueField-2 SmartNIC. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.06619, 2021.
[46] Ming Liu, Tianyi Cui, Henry Schuh, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Simon
Peter, and Karan Gupta. Offloading distributed applications onto
SmartNICs using iPipe. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2019.
[47] Ming Liu, Simon Peter, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Phitchaya Mangpo
Phothilimthana. E3: Energy-efficient microservices on SmartNICaccelerated servers. In Proc. USENIX ATC, 2019.
[48] Antonis Manousis, Rahul Anand Sharma, Vyas Sekar, and Justine
Sherry. Contention-aware performance prediction for virtualized
network functions. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2020.

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness

[49] Jason Mars, Lingjia Tang, and Robert Hundt. Heterogeneity in “homogeneous” warehouse-scale computers: A performance opportunity.
IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, 10(2):29–32, 2011.
[50] Jason Mars, Lingjia Tang, Robert Hundt, Kevin Skadron, and Mary Lou
Soffa. Bubble-up: Increasing utilization in modern warehouse scale
computers via sensible co-locations. In Proc. IEEE/ACM MICRO, 2011.
[51] Sebastiano Miano, Alireza Sanaee, Fulvio Risso, Gábor Rétvári, and
Gianni Antichi. Domain specific run time optimization for software
data planes. In Proc. ACM ASPLOS, 2022.
[52] Amirhossein Mirhosseini and Thomas F. Wenisch. The queuing-first
approach for tail management of interactive services. IEEE Micro,
39(4):55–64, 2019.
[53] Katsikas Georgios P., Barbette Tom, Kostić Dejan, Steinert Rebecca,
and Maguire Gerald Q. Metron: NFV service chains at the true speed
of the underlying hardware. In Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2018.
[54] Aurojit Panda, Sangjin Han, Keon Jang, Melvin Walls, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. NetBricks: Taking the V out of NFV. In
Proc. USENIX OSDI, 2016.
[55] Yiming Qiu, Jiarong Xing, Kuo-Feng Hsu, Qiao Kang, Ming Liu, Srinivas Narayana, and Ang Chen. Automated SmartNIC offloading insights for network functions. In Proc. ACM SOSP, 2021.
[56] Khashab Sajy, Rashelbach Alon, and Silberstein Mark. Multitenant
in-network acceleration with SwitchVM. In Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2024.
[57] Robert R. Schaller. Moore’s law: Past, present, and future. IEEE Spectr.,
34(6):52–59, 1997.
[58] Rajath Shashidhara, Tim Stamler, Antoine Kaufmann, and Simon Peter. FlexTOE: Flexible TCP offload with fine-grained parallelism. In
Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2022.
[59] Qiang Su, Chuanwen Wang, Zhixiong Niu, Ran Shu, Peng Cheng,
Yongqiang Xiong, Dongsu Han, Chun Xue Jason, and Hong Xu. PipeDevice: A hardware-software co-design approach to intra-host container communication. In Proc. ACM CoNEXT, 2022.

[60] Qiang Su, Shaofeng Wu, Zhixiong Niu, Ran Shu, Peng Cheng,
Yongqiang Xiong, Chun Jason Xue, Zaoxing Liu, and Hong Xu.
Meili: Enabling SmartNIC as a service in the cloud. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11871, 2024.
[61] Chen Sun, Jun Bi, Zhilong Zheng, Heng Yu, and Hongxin Hu. NFP: Enabling network function parallelism in NFV. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
2017.
[62] Naru Sundar, Brad Burres, Yadong Li, Dave Minturn, Brian Johnson,
and Nupur Jain. An in-depth look at the Intel IPU E2000. In Proc. IEEE
ISSCC, 2023.
[63] Amin Tootoonchian, Aurojit Panda, Chang Lan, Melvin Walls, Katerina Argyraki, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. ResQ: Enabling
SLOs in network function virtualization. In Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2018.
[64] Tao Wang, Xiangrui Yang, Gianni Antichi, Anirudh Sivaraman, and
Aurojit Panda. Isolation mechanisms for high-speed packet-processing
pipelines. In Proc. USENIX NSDI, 2022.
[65] Xingda Wei, Rongxin Cheng, Yuhan Yang, Rong Chen, and Haibo
Chen. Characterizing off-path SmartNIC for accelerating distributed
systems. In Proc. USENIX OSDI, 2023.
[66] Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. New algorithms for bin packing. Journal of
the ACM, 27(2):207–227, 1980.
[67] Li Lyna Zhang, Shihao Han, Jianyu Wei, Ningxin Zheng, Ting Cao,
Yuqing Yang, and Yunxin Liu. nn-Meter: Towards accurate latency
prediction of deep-learning model inference on diverse edge devices.
In Proc. ACM MobiSys, 2021.
[68] Wei Zhang, Guyue Liu, Wenhui Zhang, Neel Shah, Phillip Lopreiato,
Gregoire Todeschi, K.K. Ramakrishnan, and Timothy Wood. OpenNetVM: A platform for high performance network service chains. In
Proc. ACM HotMIddlebox, 2016.
[69] Zhilong Zheng, Jun Bi, Heng Yu, Haiping Wang, Chen Sun, Hongxin
Hu, and Jianping Wu. Octans: Optimal placement of service function
chains in many-core systems. In Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 2019.

