arXiv:2405.05529v5 [cs.NI] 9 Feb 2025

Performance Prediction of On-NIC Network Functions
with Multi-Resource Contention and Traffic Awareness
Shaofeng Wu∗

Qiang Su∗

sfwu22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

jacksonsq97@gmail.com
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

Zhixiong Niu

Hong Xu

zhniu@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China

hongxu@cuhk.edu.hk
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
Network function (NF) offloading on SmartNICs has been
widely used in modern data centers, offering benefits in host
resource saving and programmability. Co-running NFs on
the same SmartNICs can cause performance interference due
to contention of onboard resources. To meet performance
SLAs while ensuring efficient resource management, operators need mechanisms to predict NF performance under
such contention. However, existing solutions lack SmartNICspecific knowledge and exhibit limited traffic awareness,
leading to poor accuracy for on-NIC NFs.
This paper proposes Yala, a novel performance predictive
system for on-NIC NFs. Yala builds upon the key observation
that co-located NFs contend for multiple resources, including onboard accelerators and the memory subsystem. It also
facilitates traffic awareness according to the behaviors of
individual resources to maintain accuracy as the external
traffic attributes vary. Evaluation using BlueField-2 SmartNICs shows that Yala improves the prediction accuracy by
78.8% and reduces SLA violations by 92.2% compared to stateof-the-art approaches, and enables new practical usecases.
CCS Concepts: • Networks → Network performance
modeling; • Hardware → Networking hardware.
Keywords: Network Function, SmartNIC, Resource Contention, Performance Prediction

1

Introduction

SmartNICs have been prevalent in modern data centers to
deploy diverse network functions (NF) due to their benefits
in programmability and host resource saving [37, 42, 44, 45,
47, 55, 57, 59, 65]. They typically integrate heterogeneous
onboard resources, such as SoC cores and domain-specific
hardware accelerators, to cater to various NF demands. Moreover, vendors are developing increasingly resourceful NICs
to meet evolving offloading needs [9, 12, 62]. To fully leverage
∗ Equal contribution. The work was done when Qiang was with City University of Hong Kong.

these resources, it is common practice to co-locate multiple
NFs on the same NIC [36, 42, 47, 60].
Unfortunately, sharing SmartNIC resources among colocated NFs may lead to contention and performance degradation, posing challenges in maintaining the SLAs. One potential solution is to implement stringent resource isolation
mechanisms on SmartNICs. Yet, previous work on this front
requires specific NIC hardware architecture support and substantial rewriting of NF programs to accommodate new isolation abstractions [36, 39], thus limiting their practical deployment. Consequently, developers still need extensive handtuning to ensure simultaneous SLA fulfillment for co-located
NFs, which is time-consuming and error-prone [36, 41, 47].
Ideally, if operators can predict the performance drop an
NF will suffer before actually co-running it with other NFs
on the same NIC, they can make better resource management decisions on existing infrastructure and NF implementations. Concretely, SmartNIC platforms [40, 42, 47, 60] and
SmartNIC-assisted clouds [2, 16, 29] can maximize NF colocations in SmartNIC offloading while minimizing SLA violations, which correspond to lower total cost of ownership
(TCO) for providers and better experience for tenants, and
enjoy faster diagnosis and reasoning of on-NIC NF performance compared to slow manual analysis [37, 55]. To achieve
these, we need a systematic on-NIC NF performance prediction framework, which entails two new challenges.
First, on-NIC NFs often utilize diverse onboard resources
including memory and various hardware accelerators, making it common that contentions occur across heterogeneous
resources. Prior work on NF performance prediction has primarily focused on memory subsystem contention as the sole
source of performance interference for on-server NFs [33,
48, 50]. We showcase that the state-of-the-art SLOMO [48]
encounters high prediction errors when co-locating NFs contend for both memory and regex accelerator on a BlueField-2
SmartNIC, with ∼20% in the median and ∼60% in the worst
case (§2.2.1). The community lacks a clear understanding of
(1) the impact of contention on individual domain-specific
accelerators and (2) the overall effect of multi-resource contention on performance.

