Teola: Towards End-to-End Optimization of LLM-based
Applications
Xin Tan1 , Yimin Jiang2 , Yitao Yang1 , Hong Xu1
1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Unaffiliated

Searching
Embedding

100

Large language model (LLM)-based applications consist of
both LLM and non-LLM components, each contributing to
the end-to-end latency. Despite great efforts to optimize
LLM inference, end-to-end workflow optimization has been
overlooked. Existing frameworks employ coarse-grained orchestration with task modules, which confines optimizations
to within each module and yields suboptimal scheduling
decisions.
We propose fine-grained end-to-end orchestration, which
utilizes task primitives as the basic units and represents each
query’s workflow as a primitive-level dataflow graph. This
explicitly exposes a much larger design space, enables optimizations in parallelization and pipelining across primitives
of different modules, and enhances scheduling to improve
application-level performance. We build Teola, a novel orchestration framework for LLM-based applications that implements this scheme. Comprehensive experiments show
that Teola can achieve up to 2.09x speedup over existing
systems across various popular LLM applications. The code
is available at https://github.com/NetX-lab/Ayo.

1

Indexing
API Calls

Assistant Model
LLM Prefilling

LLM Decoding

LLM agent

Doc QA w/
Doc QA w/
naive RAG advanced RAG

80
Percentage

arXiv:2407.00326v3 [cs.DC] 31 Mar 2025

Abstract

60
40
20
0

SE generation

Figure 1. Latency breakdown of each task module for various applications in Figure 2 using LlamaIndex [1]. The LLM synthesizing
module time is divided into prefilling and decoding.

While significant efforts have been made to optimize LLM
inference across various aspects [25, 30, 48, 76, 80], little attention has been paid to the end-to-end performance of LLMbased applications composed of diverse modules. Figure 1
illustrates the execution time breakdown of several popular
LLM-based applications with Llamaindex [1]. The non-LLM
modules account for a significant portion of the end-to-end
latency, and in some cases (Document question answering
with RAG) even more than 50%. Optimizing end-to-end performance, however, faces more difficulties than one would
expect in current orchestration frameworks [1, 10, 12, 17].
They organize the workflow as a simple module-based chain
pipeline (see Figure 3a), where each module independently
and sequentially handles a high-level task using its own execution engines (e.g. vLLM [48] for LLM inference). Despite
its ease of use, this coarse-grained chaining scheme significantly limits the potential for workflow-level joint optimization across modules, as they treat each module as a black-box
(§2.2). Additionally, the decoupling of frontend orchestration and backend execution implies that request scheduling
cannot optimize for the application’s overall performance,
forcing it to instead optimizing per-request performance,
which may actually degrade the overall efficiency (§2.3).
In this paper, we argue for a finer-grained exposition and
orchestration of LLM-based applications, which can be the
bedrock of end-to-end optimization. Rather than using the
module-based chaining, we orchestrate with a primitive-level
dataflow graph, where the task primitive serves as the basic
unit. Each primitive is a symbolic node in the graph responsible for a specific primitive operation, and has a metadata
profile to store its key attributes (§2.2). This primitive-level

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) and their multi-modal variants have revolutionized user query understanding and content generation. This breakthrough has transformed many
traditional and emerging applications. For instance, some
search engines have integrated LLMs into their query processing pipelines, enhancing user experiences [4, 18]. Additionally, AI agents, a new paradigm for human-machine
interaction, have led to new applications such as emotional
companionship [5] and personalized assistants [21].
Despite being the most intelligent component in the applications, LLMs by themselves often cannot satisfy the diverse and complicated user requirements. Examples include
knowledge timeliness and long context understanding, for
which LLMs cannot perform well due to their design. If not
properly handled, these problems can easily cause the wellknown hallucination issue [40]. To mitigate such problems,
many techniques have been proposed, including RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) [49, 57], external function
calls [16, 41, 47] and even multiple LLM interactions. Popular frameworks such as Langchain [12] and LlamaIndex [1]
support integrating various modules and building the endto-end pipelines mentioned above.
1

