are called collective algorithms and define the static path for
each chunk during the execution of collective communication.
Example collective algorithms’ traffic patterns are depicted
in Fig. 5. The intuition for having different algorithms for the
same collective pattern is to minimize contention on distinct
physical network topologies.
III. M OTIVATION AND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
A. Importance of Topology-aware Collectives
The physical characteristics of the network topology (including connectivity, link latencies, and link bandwidths)
heavily influence network transmission behavior. We define
a topology-aware collective algorithm as one intricately optimized alongside the underlying topology to achieve optimal
collective performance [23], [43]. Table I summarizes common
topology-aware algorithms and their target topologies.
Example traffic patterns of basic collective algorithms are
depicted in Fig. 5. When these patterns are mapped over
their preferred topologies, they can efficiently utilize links in
the topology every cycle without any contention. However,
executing a collective algorithm on its unpreferred physical
topology leads to contention (i.e., oversubscription) on certain
links and low or even no utilization (i.e., undersubscription)
on others. This effect can be observed in the link subscription heat map in Fig. 1. We also quantify these effects in
Fig. 2(a). On the Ring network, the topology-aware Ring
algorithm exhibited a 16.71× higher All-Reduce bandwidth
than the Direct algorithm. Conversely, on the FullyConnected
topology, the Direct algorithm demonstrated a performance
improvement of 62.63× over the Ring algorithm. Fig. 2(b)
also demonstrates that the optimal topology-aware collective
could change depending on the target collective pattern. Unlike
the 1 GB All-Reduce case, for 1 KB, the Direct algorithm
outperformed Ring since each network transmission is latencybound and prefers short-distance collective algorithms.
These results emphasize the importance of designing optimal topology-aware collective algorithms that encapsulate
both communication patterns and network topology. Modern
CCLs [32], [33], [35] implement a range of predefined basic
collective algorithms, selecting them based on network features as shown in Fig. 3(a). Unfortunately, this fundamentally
limits the physical topologies they can efficiently support.
B. Heterogeneity, Asymmetry, and Scale of ML Systems
To provide maximum network resources, state-of-the-art
distributed ML platforms are leveraging various network
topologies and technologies, introducing bandwidth heterogeneity and asymmetry. Notable examples include asymmetric
2D Mesh topology with wafer-scale technologies as implemented by Cerebras CS-2 [4] and Tesla Dojo [5] systems. Heterogeneous multi-dimensional scale-up and scale-out switches
in NVIDIA DGX clusters [11], [12], and the integration of
scale-up and photonic technologies by Google Cloud TPU [2],
[44] are other examples. Moreover, the scale of recent ML
clusters is also increasing to accommodate larger workloads,
incorporating thousands to even tens of thousands of NPUs.

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4
Step 1

Step 1
Step 2

Step 1

Step 2

ReduceScatter

Step 3
Step 3

Step 4
Step 5

Step 2

Step 4

All-Gather

Step 6
(a) (unidirectional) Ring

(b) Direct

(c) Recursive Halving-Doubling

Example All-Reduce algorithms and their traffic patterns.
In Reduce-Scatter, each red arrow represents sending and adding a
chunk to the local data. For All-Gather, each blue arrow signifies
forwarding a chunk. Depending on the network connectivity, each
step may encounter link congestion and underutilization.
Fig. 5.

This trend is evident in Google Cloud TPUv5 pods with 8,960
TPUs [45], the OpenAI cluster with 7,500 GPUs [46], and
Meta’s Research Supercluster equipped with 24K GPUs [47].
C. Challenge: Designing Topology-aware Collectives
Given the importance of topology-aware collective algorithms in distributed ML, designing them for commonly used
networks is an active research field. For example, recent
proposals devise All-Reduce algorithms for 2D Mesh [48]
and DragonFly [49] topologies. However, this process requires
engineering and validation efforts for each new topology
variant. Flattened Butterfly [50], MegaFly [51], SlimFly [52],
and Tofu [53] are just a few examples that do not yet
have specialized collective algorithms and default to baseline
collective algorithms, which could lead to network resource
underutilization. Even existing collective algorithms are often
tuned under multiple assumptions, such as homogeneous link
bandwidths or specific message sizes, making them susceptible
to potential performance degradation in practice.
D. Solution: Topology-aware Collective Synthesizer
To address the challenges inherent in designing topologyaware collective algorithms manually, the development of an
autonomous synthesis framework capable of automatically
generating topology-aware collective algorithms is imperative.
Such a toolchain can alleviate the burden on human experts to
manually configure the routing of each chunk. Additionally,
by automatically exploring the design space, these frameworks have the potential to generate higher-quality collective
algorithms for specific targets. This is particularly crucial as
network topologies become larger and more intricate, further
complicating the task of design and optimization.
IV. TACOS
A. Background on Time-expanded Network
We start introducing TACOS by bringing the notion of Timeexpanded Network (TEN) to the distributed ML domain. TEN
is widely used in flow optimization problems [39], [54], [55]
because it enables judicious consideration of both network
topology and timing information in a single data structure.
A visual example of a homogeneous, asymmetric 3-NPU
topology is shown in Fig. 6(a), as well as its TEN representation in Fig. 6(b). Each NPU in the base topology forms
a column of vertices in the TEN representation, with each

