Enabling Efficient Transaction Processing on
CXL-Based Memory Sharing
Zhao Wang
School of Integrated Circuits
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China
wangzhao21@pku.edu.cn
Yiqi Chen
School of Integrated Circuits
Peking University
Beijing, China
yiqi.chen@pku.edu.cn
Cong Li
School of Integrated Circuits
Peking University
Beijing, China
leesou@pku.edu.cn
Yijin Guan∗
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab
Hangzhou, China
yijin.gyj@alibaba-inc.com
Dimin Niu
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab
Hangzhou, China
dimin.niu@alibaba-inc.com
Tianchan Guan
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab
Hangzhou, China
tianchan.gtc@alibaba-inc.com
Zhaoyang Du
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab
Hangzhou, China
zhaoyang.dcy@alibaba-inc.com
Xingda Wei
Institute of Parallel and Distributed
Systems, SEIEE
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
wxdwfc@sjtu.edu.cn
Guangyu Sun∗
School of Integrated Circuits
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
for Integrated Circuits
Peking University
Beijing, China
GSun@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Transaction processing systems are the crux for modern
data-center applications, yet current multi-node systems are
slow due to network overheads. This paper advocates for
Compute Express Link (CXL) as a network alternative, which
enables low-latency and cache-coherent shared memory ac-
cesses. However, directly adopting standard CXL primitives
leads to performance degradation due to the high cost of
maintaining cross-node cache coherence. To address the
CXL challenges, this paper introduces CtXnL, a software-
hardware co-designed system that implements a novel hy-
brid coherence primitive tailored to the loosely coherent na-
ture of transactional data. The core innovation of CtXnL is
empowering transaction system developers with the ability
to selectively achieve data coherence. Our evaluations on
OLTP workloads demonstrate that CtXnL enhances perfor-
mance, outperforming current network-based systems and
achieves with up to 2.08x greater throughput than vanilla
CXL memory sharing architectures across universal transac-
tion processing policies.
1 Introduction
Transactions provide high availability and strict serializabil-
ity, simplifying programming and reasoning about concur-
rency issues. However, scaling single-node transaction sys-
tems [75, 77, 86] beyond a node is challenging due to their
reliance on shared-memory architectures. When datasets
∗co-corresponding author
exceed a single node’s memory capacity, a common solution
is to employ a distributed transaction system that partitions
the data into multiple shards and distributes them across dif-
ferent nodes. This approach utilizes networking techniques,
such as RDMA [18, 19, 35, 80], to fetch remote data and syn-
chronize transactions across nodes. However, distributed
transactions are notorious for their poor performance, often
attributed to network stack overheads [18, 19, 35, 36, 56, 80].
Despite numerous optimizations in software [35, 36, 56, 80]
and hardware [3, 18, 30, 39, 45, 64, 87] aimed at mitigating
these issues, they have not fully overcome the inherent per-
formance disadvantages of networking techniques.
The introduction of Compute Express Link (CXL) tech-
nologies [16, 67, 68], particularly the CXL 3.0 specification,
provides a promising solution for achieving both scalabil-
ity and efficiency in transaction systems. This technology
defines a Global Fabric Attached Memory (G-FAM) node,
which allows compute nodes to access G-FAM with memory
semantics, and to cache G-FAM data within their processor
cache hierarchies. The CXL back-invalidation (BI) scheme
maintains cross-node coherence by monitoring and inval-
idating outdated caches at the CXL fabric using a MESI-
like protocol. With the optimized datapath, CXL achieves
ultra-low link latency and sub-microsecond G-FAM access
latencies [22, 33, 43, 53, 72, 91]. Despite the potential, it re-
mains unknown whether the coherence link of CXL suits
transaction processing.
1
arXiv:2502.11046v2
[cs.AR]
23
Jul
2025
