ShadowLoad: Injecting State into Hardware Prefetchers
Lorenz Hetterich
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
lorenz.hetterich@cispa.de
Fabian Thomas
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
fabian.thomas@cispa.de
Lukas Gerlach
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
lukas.gerlach@cispa.de
Ruiyi Zhang
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
ruiyi.zhang@cispa.de
Nils Bernsdorf
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
nibe00018@stud.uni-saarland.de
Eduard Ebert
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
edeb00001@stud.uni-saarland.de
Michael Schwarz
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information Security
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany
michael.schwarz@cispa.de
Abstract
Hardware prefetchers are an optimization in modern CPUs
that predict memory accesses and preemptively load the
corresponding value into the cache. Previous work showed
that the internal state of hardware prefetchers can act as a
side channel, leaking information across security boundaries
such as processes, user and kernel space, and even trusted
execution environments.
In this paper, we present ShadowLoad, a new attack primi-
tive to bring inaccessible victim data into the cache by inject-
ing state into the hardware prefetcher. ShadowLoad relies on
the inner workings of the hardware stride prefetchers, which
we automatically reverse-engineer using our tool StrideRE.
We illustrate how ShadowLoad extends the attack surface of
existing microarchitectural attacks such as Meltdown and
software-based power analysis attacks like Collide+Power
and how it can partially bypass L1TF mitigations on clouds,
such as AWS. We further demonstrate FetchProbe, a stride
prefetcher side-channel attack leaking offsets of memory
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716020
accesses with sub-cache-line granularity, extending previ-
ous work on control-flow leakage. We demonstrate Fetch-
Probe on the side-channel hardened Base64 implementa-
tion of WolfSSL, showing that even real-world side-channel-
hardened implementations can be attacked with our new
attack.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Side-channel
analysis and countermeasures; Hardware reverse en-
gineering; Cryptanalysis and other attacks; Virtualization
and security.
Keywords: microarchitecture, prefetcher, side channel
ACM Reference Format:
Lorenz Hetterich, Fabian Thomas, Lukas Gerlach, Ruiyi Zhang, Nils
Bernsdorf, Eduard Ebert, and Michael Schwarz. 2025. ShadowLoad:
Injecting State into Hardware Prefetchers. In Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3676641.3716020
1 Introduction
Microarchitectural attacks often exploit undocumented CPU
implementation details. A wide range of microarchitectural
elements including caches [28, 53], predictors [20], prefetch-
ers [10, 23], and dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
(DVFS) [49], have been exploited for microarchitectural at-
tacks. While prediction-based attacks have been used as side
channels [8] and for transient-execution attacks [20], they
primarily focus on branch prediction. Only recently have re-
searchers investigated the prediction capability of hardware
prefetchers [6, 33, 45, 56]. However, the focus has been on
control flow [6] and data injection [45] (cf. Table 1). Hence,
