Early Termination for Hyperdimensional
Computing Using Inferential Statistics
Pu (Luke) Yi
lukeyi@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
Yifan Yang
yyang29@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
Chae Young Lee
chae@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
Sara Achour
sachour@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
Abstract
Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) is a brain-inspired,
lightweight computing paradigm that has shown great poten-
tial for inference on the edge and on emerging hardware tech-
nologies, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on certain clas-
sification tasks. HDC classifiers are inherently error resilient
and support early termination of inference to approximate
classification results. Practitioners have developed heuristic
methods to terminate inference early for individual inputs,
reducing the computation of inference at the cost of accu-
racy. These techniques lack statistical guarantees and may
unacceptably degrade classification accuracy or terminate
inference later than is needed to obtain an accuracy result.
We present Omen, the first dynamic HDC optimizer that
uses inferential statistics to terminate inference early while
providing accuracy guarantees. To realize Omen, we develop
a statistical view of HDC that reframes HD computations as
statisticalsamplingandtestingtasks,enablingtheuseofstatis-
tical tests. We evaluate Omen on 19 benchmark instantiations
of four classification tasks. Omen is computationally efficient,
delivering up to 7.21–12.18× inference speed-ups over an
unoptimized baseline while only incurring a 0.0–0.7% drop
in accuracy. Omen outperforms heuristic methods, achiev-
ing an additional 0.04–5.85× inference speed-up over the
unoptimized baseline compared to heuristic methods while
maintaining higher or comparable accuracy.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Emerging languages and
compilers; Memory and dense storage; • Software and its
engineering → Software notations and tools.
Keywords: program optimization, unconventional comput-
ing, hyperdimensional computing, emerging hardware tech-
nologies, edge machine learning
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707254
ACM Reference Format:
Pu (Luke) Yi, Yifan Yang, Chae Young Lee, and Sara Achour. 2025.
Early Termination for Hyperdimensional Computing Using Infer-
ential Statistics. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Con-
ference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025,
Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707254
1 Introduction
Lightweight machine learning (ML) models have been effec-
tiveinperformingclassificationontheedgeforbiomedical,in-
dustrial, and environmental monitoring domains—examples
include anomaly detection, wake word recognition, action
prediction, and classification of signal patterns [22, 37]. In re-
cent years, researchers and practitioners have developed ML
classifiers that leverage hyperdimensional computing (HDC),
an emerging computing paradigm, to perform inference on
highly resource-constrained edge devices and error-prone
emerging hardware platforms [6, 32, 39, 50, 67]. HDC classi-
fiers are attractive targets for these platforms because their
operators are resource efficient and amenable to optimization,
the compute model is highly robust to errors, and inference
results can be easily approximated.
1.1 HDC Classifiers and Early Termination
Hyperdimensional computing (HDC) is an emerging com-
puting paradigm that uses high-dimensional vectors called
hypervectors as the basic data type. In HDC, information is
encoded in the distances between hypervectors. This repre-
sentation is inherently error resilient and amenable to ap-
proximation. Data are encoded with hypervectors through
the use of HD operators which compute hypervectors that
are similar/dissimilar to their hypervector operands. Because
all HD operators are element-wise operators and distances
are approximable, HD computations are implementable as
streaming computations that may be terminated early to ob-
tain approximate results.
342
