Forecasting GPU Performance for Deep Learning
Training and Inference
Seonho Lee
seonho.lee@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
Amar Phanishayee∗
aphanishayee@meta.com
Meta
Seattle, WA, USA
Divya Mahajan
divya.mahajan@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
Abstract
Deep learning kernels exhibit a high level of predictable
memory accesses and compute patterns, making GPU’s archi-
tecture well-suited for their execution. Moreover, software
and runtime system for GPUs further enable optimizations
that aim to better utilize the stream multiprocessors, on-chip
bandwidth, multiple levels of cache hierarchy, and off-chip
high-bandwidth memory. In the context of deep learning,
the entire space of models and GPUs is constantly evolv-
ing, as newer models emerge with simultaneous upgrades
to the device. However, access to newer GPUs is often lim-
ited, raising important questions about the performance of
new model architectures on existing GPUs, existing models on
new GPUs, and new model architectures on new GPUs. To ad-
dress these questions, we introduce NeuSight, a forecasting
framework to predict the performance of a diverse range of
deep learning models, for both training and inference, on
unseen GPUs, without requiring actual execution of the tar-
get model on the target GPU. The framework leverages both
GPU hardware behavior and software library optimizations
to estimate the end-to-end performance of these models. We
observe that prior work in this area suffers from high ab-
solute error percentages when forecasting performance on
unseen models and new GPUs, as they attempt to model the
complex task of predicting the latency of a deep learning
kernel on a GPU directly using a machine learning approach.
Instead, with NeuSight, we decompose the prediction into
smaller problems, while bounding the prediction through
fundamental performance laws. NeuSight decomposes a
single deep learning kernel prediction into smaller working
sets called tiles, which are executed independently on the
∗Work done while at Microsoft Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707265
GPU. Tile-granularity predictions are determined using a
machine learning approach and aggregated to estimate the
end-to-end latency. As such, NeuSight outperforms prior
work across a variety of deep learning workloads and the
most up-to-date GPUs. It reduces the percentage error from
121.4% and 30.8% to 2.3% in predicting the latency of GPT3
model for training and inference on H100, in comparison to
state-of-the-art prior work, respectively, where GPT3 and
H100 were not used to train any framework.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Machine
learning; • Computer systems organization → Parallel
architectures.
Keywords: GPU Performance Forecasting, ML for Systems,
Deep Learning, Training and Inference
ACM Reference Format:
Seonho Lee, Amar Phanishayee, and Divya Mahajan. 2025. Fore-
casting GPU Performance for Deep Learning Training and In-
ference. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operat-
ing Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rot-
terdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707265
1 Introduction
GPUs are the canonical platform to be deployed across any
Artificial Intelligence (AI) cluster. There are two main rea-
sons for their widespread adoption for deep learning: (1) the
parallel compute engines that mitigate the Von-Neumann
overheads of general purpose CPUs and (2) closely knit
software libraries that exploit the architecture for various
Deep Neural Network (DNN) kernels [32, 38]. This trend has
been further augmented by the availability of specialized
AI servers, aiming to minimize the overheads of distributed
execution [3, 40].
In this rapidly evolving field of AI, continuous iterations
are introduced. However, newer GPUs are limited in ac-
cess - either due to the long lead time (of upto 52 weeks
for H100 [12]) or their prohibitively high cost. Currently,
devising new models and the success of their execution is
contingent on the availability of underlying hardware. As
shown in Figure 1, since 2013, we have witnessed an exponen-
tial growth in model size, accompanied by a corresponding
increase in the peak performance of GPUs. In summary, the
1
arXiv:2407.13853v3
[cs.LG]
12
Dec
2024
