ByteFS: System Support for (CXL-based)
Memory-Semantic Solid-State Drives
Shaobo Li∗
shaobol2@illinois.edu
University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
Yirui Eric Zhou∗
yiruiz2@illinois.edu
University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
Hao Ren
haor2@illinois.edu
University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
Jian Huang
jianh@illinois.edu
University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
Abstract
Unlike non-volatile memory that resides on the processor
memory bus, memory-semantic solid-state drives (SSDs) sup-
port both byte and block access granularity via PCIe or CXL
interconnects. They provide scalable memory capacity using
NANDflashatamuchlowercost.Inaddition,theyhavediffer-
entperformancecharacteristicsfortheirdualbyte/blockinter-
face respectively, while offering essential memory semantics
forupper-levelsoftware.Suchabyte-accessiblestoragedevice
provides new implications on the software system design.
In this paper, we develop a new file system, named ByteFS,
by rethinking the design primitives of file systems and SSD
firmware to exploit the advantages of both byte and block-
granular data accesses. ByteFS supports byte-granular data
persistence to retain the persistence nature of SSDs. It ex-
tends the core data structure of file systems by enabling dual
byte/block-granular data accesses. To facilitate the support
for byte-granular writes, ByteFS manages the internal DRAM
of SSD firmware in a log-structured manner and enables data
coalescing to reduce the unnecessary I/O traffic to flash chips.
ByteFS also enables coordinated data caching between the
host page cache and SSD cache for best utilizing the precious
memory resource. We implement ByteFS on both a real pro-
grammable SSD and an emulated memory-semantic SSD for
sensitivity study. Compared to state-of-the-art file systems
for non-volatile memory and conventional SSDs, ByteFS out-
performs them by up to 2.7×, while preserving the essential
properties of a file system. ByteFS also reduces the write traf-
fic to SSDs by up to 5.1× by alleviating unnecessary writes
caused by both metadata and data updates in file systems.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → File
systems management; • Hardware → External storage.
∗Co-primary authors.
This work is licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike Inter-
national 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707250
Keywords: FileSystem,Byte-addressableSSD,CXL,Memory-
Semantic Storage
ACM Reference Format:
Shaobo Li, Yirui Eric Zhou, Hao Ren, and Jian Huang. 2025. ByteFS:
SystemSupportfor(CXL-based)Memory-SemanticSolid-StateDrives.
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Archi-
tectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Nether-
lands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3669940.3707250
1 Introduction
Modern computer systems have an increasing demand for
storage-class memory (SCM) [9, 17], as it promises many ad-
vantages such as scalable storage capacity, byte-addressable
data accesses, and data durability. A typical example is non-
volatile memory (NVM), which attracted much attention over
the past decade [29, 37, 47, 51]. However, due to the insuffi-
cient supply of mature products on the market [7], we have
to seek alternative practical memory technologies.
Thanks to the byte-accessibility of the PCIe interconnect
(e.g., NVMe and CXL), the commodity flash-based SSDs can
providebyte-addressabledataaccessesbyutilizingthememory-
mapped I/O interface (MMIO) [10, 12, 40]. Therefore, we can
access SSDs with both byte and block granularity. We call
them as memory-semantic SSDs (M-SSD). Unlike NVM de-
vices such as Intel Optane Persistent Memory that use PCM-
like storage medium and reside on the processor memory
bus [44], the M-SSD is PCIe attached and built upon the ma-
ture NAND flash technology, which offers unique advantages.
First, it relies solely on the byte-accessibility support of the
existing PCIe interface, thus a majority of the commodity
PCIe-attached SSDs can be reformed as memory-semantic
SSDs. For instance, Samsung publicized its CXL-based SSDs
built on the commodity NVMe SSDs recently [40]. Second,
its backend storage medium NAND flash has much lower
cost, and its storage capacity can easily scale up to terabytes
per PCIe slot [10]. Third, it provides the memory interface
for software systems while preserving compelling storage
properties such as data durability and simple deployment.
However,fordecades,systemssoftwarelikefilesystemsare
used to the generic block interface to access SSDs, resulting in
high I/O amplification [10, 34]. They lack the support for dual
byte and block interface for M-SSDs, causing sub-optimal
arXiv:2501.04993v1
[cs.OS]
9
Jan
2025
