The Mutators Reloaded: Fuzzing Compilers with Large
Language Model Generated Mutation Operators
Xianfei Ou

Cong Li

Yanyan Jiang

Chang Xu

State Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
ouxianfei@smail.nju.edu.cn

Ant Group & School of
Cyber Science and Tech.,
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China
chifei.lc@antgroup.com

State Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
jyy@nju.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
changxu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Crafting high-quality mutators–the core of mutation-based
fuzzing that shapes the search space–is challenging. It requires human expertise and creativity, and their implementation demands knowledge of compiler internals. This paper
presents MetaMut framework for developing new, useful
mutators for compiler fuzzing. It integrates our compilerdomain knowledge into prompts and processes that can best
harness the capabilities of a large language model. With
MetaMut, we have successfully created 118 semantic-aware
mutators at approximately $0.5 each, with only moderate
human effort. With these mutators, our fuzzer uncovered
131 bugs in GCC and Clang, 129 of which were confirmed or
fixed. The success of MetaMut suggests that the integration
of AI into software and system engineering tasks traditionally thought to require expert human intervention could be
a promising research direction.
ACM Reference Format:
Xianfei Ou, Cong Li, Yanyan Jiang, and Chang Xu. 2024. The Mutators Reloaded: Fuzzing Compilers with Large Language Model
Generated Mutation Operators. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024,
La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674171

1

Introduction

Compiler fuzzing has gained significant attention over the
past decades [9–11, 32, 35, 36, 45, 53, 56]. By generating a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674171

Action/Program

Expert Structure List

+

Task
+ Creativity &
Description
Sampling Hints

1 Mutator Invention
Template w/ 𝜇AST API

Expert

Mutator Example

+

AI

Mutator Description

2 Implementation Synthesis
AI

Mutator Implementation (𝜇)
3 Validation and Refinement

𝜇

Compile

Run

AI

Request
Bug Fix

Feedback

fail

Validity Expert
Check
pass

Valid Mutator

Figure 1. The MetaMut framework. We provided the
prompts, code templates, auxiliary libraries, and validation
scripts (colored boxes). An LLM takes care of all rest tedious
work of mutator invention and implementation synthesis
(gray boxes in bold). Underlined items are created by LLM.
multitude of test programs, these fuzzers uncovered thousands of critical bugs in production compilers such as GCC
and LLVM, substantially enhancing their quality [10, 11].
Mutation-based search is a mainstream approach to compiler fuzzing. In mutation-based fuzzing, mutation operators,
or mutators, define the shape of the search space1 and thus
determine the potential and limitations of the technique. Effective mutators must be aware of both the program’s syntax
and semantic structure to produce valid and diverse mutants
that can reach deeper behaviors of compiler components,
such as IR generation, program analysis, and optimization.
However, crafting high-quality mutators is challenging.
Design and implementation of effective mutators require
1 Mutators determine each test program’s all possible descendants (mutants).

Beginning with a set of seed programs, applying mutators broadens this set
into an expanded array of test programs, thereby creating a search space (a
graph where each vertex corresponds to a test program). Fuzzers adopt a
breadth-first-like search strategy to sample test programs in this graph.

