ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

FreshId:
Valid ID required

TypeEnv:
both values have type i8

%42 = arith.divsi %40, %27 : i8
ConcreteVal:
%27 ≠ 0, and if %40 = minInt, then %27 ≠ -1.

FreshId:
Valid ID required

ConcreteTypeEnv:
Both values have concrete shape of 3xi64

%13 = tensor.cast %11, %12 :
tensor<?xi64> to tensor<3xi64>

Figure 11. Usage of semantics in the generation of the
arith.divsi and tensor.cast operations.

Pingshi Yu, Nicolas Wu, and Alastair F. Donaldson

statically known) to concrete sizes. Dynamic sizes are a part
of the tensor dialect and are type annotations where the
concrete sizes of the containers are forgotten by the type
system—allowing, for instance, functions to be written for
a family of tensors with a variable size component. Whilst
casting does not alter the value of the tensor, a runtime error
will be triggered if the sizes or the base types of the containers used in the cast do not match. Since a new value is
being created for this operation, we also require a fresh ID
generator. In addition, we need the state to implement an interface tracking the concrete types of compound containers,
in order to avoid triggering runtime errors by ensuring the
types chosen by the generator for the operation are between
compatible types. Note that the concrete type is different to
the syntactical types within MLIR: syntactical types allow for
components of the types to be elided, whereas the concrete
types track the statically inferred runtime values of the types
in the main function, and no components are elided.
3.4

The semantics is evaluated when a group of related operations, called IR fragments are generated (see point (3)
on Figure 3), and appended onto the partial program. IR
fragments are multiple chained extensions (described in Definition 3.3), which can be convenient if the extensions are
related, for instance, generating runtime checks alongside a
potentially unsafe operation at the same time.
The generator requests semantic information through interfaces. As in Definition 3.3, incremental semantics can be
thought of as the state of a partial program, and generators
use the computed state by asserting that the state implements specific interfaces/semantics. Multiple semantics may
be required by the generators through interfaces, and this
can be satisfied by a state consisting of a tuple of individual
states, each implementing one of the required interfaces. Semantic updates proceed in the expected way for tuples of
states, by updating each state of the tuple independently.
As shown in Figure 11, generating the arith.divsi operation requires several interfaces to ensure the absence of
undesirable behaviours. arith.divsi requires the inputs to
be integer types of the same width, and therefore the typing
information is needed to choose values of valid types for
the operation. The operation also creates new values, and
these need to be assigned valid IDs that do not clash with
existing ones, meaning the store should have a mechanism
for generating fresh IDs for the current scope. Moreover,
the operation contains undefined behaviours if either the
divisor is zero, or if arith.divsi MIN_INT, -1 is attempted to
be computed, resulting in a signed-division overflow as the
value -MIN_INT is not representable by the two’s complement
representation the arith dialect uses.
Similarly, in the second example of Figure 11, tensor.cast
operation is casting from a tensor with dynamic sizes (but

Test Oracles

The generator should generate programs 𝑃 that produce
some observable output. This allows the program to be compiled (and possibly executed) with an MLIR implementation,
and checked against a known expectation (oracle) for the
output to identify implementation bugs. A weak oracle is
simply checking that the compiler does not crash; we call
this the non-crash oracle. Alternatively, a stronger oracle is
via differential testing—either across different compiler implementations, or cross-checked against the Ratte-defined
semantics; we call this the differential testing oracle.
Output-producing code (e.g. prints) can be appended to
the end of the program, as a final step of generation, to allow these oracles to be checked. For the non-crash oracle,
the extra code is not necessary but can be useful in triggering/preventing some compiler passes. For the differential
testing oracle, the variables that are known to be well-defined
are used to produce an output. To ensure this is the case,
Ratte performs a well-definedness analysis of variables. For
instance, tensor.empty produces values that are not welldefined,tensor.fill always produces a well-defined value,
whilst other operations propagate the undefinedness.
3.5

Implementation and Support Code

The semantics, parsing, and generation components are implemented using ≈ 6000 lines of Haskell. Support code for orchestrating fuzzing experiments is implemented with ≈ 300
lines Python. The implementation uses Polysemy [23] as the
effect system, the Parsec [16] combinators for parsing MLIR,
and the QuickCheck [7] library for building generators.
Thus far, Ratte provides detailed support for generation
and concrete interpretation oracles for the arith compilation, covering all operations on the integer and index types.
In the linalg dialect, all operations are syntactical sugar
forms of the linalg.generic operation. Ratte provides a

