Ratte: Fuzzing for Miscompilations in Multi-Level Compilers Using Composable Semantics

best-effort implementation for generation and interpretation
of linalg.generic, supporting instances with permutationbased indexing maps, and with any valid region. Finally, for
the tensor dialect, Ratte supports a subset of operations
(empty, fill, extract, generate, constant, yield).
Overall, Ratte currently supports the interpretation and generation of 43 operations across core dialects (arith, func,
scf, linalg, vector, tensor) of the MLIR framework.
The validated semantics are also usable as an independent
reference interpreter (by parsing the MLIR generic textual
format [27]), which can help both MLIR developers and users.
The full source of Ratte generators, reference interpreters
and support code are available in the appendix.

4

Evaluation

We now present an empirical evaluation based on our experience using Ratte at various stages in its development to find
bugs in the production implementation of MLIR. Moreover,
we also compare Ratte against an existing state-of-the-art
MLIR fuzzer, MLIRSmith [41]. Our empirical evaluation centres on the following two research questions:
RQ1 How effective is Ratte for finding lowering and optimisation bugs? (Section 4.1)
RQ2 How effective is Ratte at generating programs for endto-end testing of MLIR-based compilers compared to
MLIRSmith? (Section 4.2)
We also discuss how our work led to reliability improvements to the MLIR ecosystem, including enhancements to
the MLIR language specification (Section 4.3).
A by-product of our work on modular semantics-aware
fuzzers is a composable reference implementation for a number of MLIR dialects that has been thoroughly validated
against the production implementation. We have made this
validated semantics usable as an independent reference implementation by combining it with a parser, which can help
both developers and users of MLIR.
4.1

Bugs found

Ratte is used to validate the correctness of compilations,
rather than single passes. We applied Ratte at various stages
of development to test end-to-end compilations, with an executable target dialect. These experiments were conducted in
bursts, but overall we estimate the total associated runtime
to be one week, each run executing overnight on an 8-core
laptop CPU, continuing until no new bugs were found for a
significant amount of time (≈ 6 hours). Our experiments focused on compilations targeting {llvm}, which is executable
using the mlir-cpu-runner tool, producing an output that
can be validated against the oracles (Section 3.4).
We implemented several semantics-guided generators of
full programs, covering a range of abstractions, by composing together the generators for individual operations. These

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Table 2. Generators used for bug-finding. The Name column
is the primary dialect being fuzzed. The Dialects column is
the dialects used by the generated programs. Target is the
target dialect of the tested compilation in MLIR.
Name

Dialects

Target

Arith
LinAlg
Tensor

{arith, scf, func, vector}
{linalg, arith, func, vector}
{tensor, arith, func, vector}

{llvm}
{llvm}
{llvm}

generators yield compileable programs that are free from undefined behaviours by construction (which we call UB-free).
Details on the generators are summarised in Table 2.
So far, our use of Ratte led to the discovery of 8 previously
unknown bugs, which are summarised in Table 3. Of the
8 bugs detected, 6 were miscompilations, and 2 of the 6
miscompilations were caused by bugs in the lowering passes.
The remaining 2 bugs are programs that have been wrongly
rejected by the static checks of the compiler, yielding no
code when they should have been compiled successfully.
All bugs found depend on Ratte generating statically correct MLIR programs. This is the case even for verifier bugs:
with generators like MLIRSmith that produce an unpredictable mixture of valid vs. invalid programs, there is no
way to know if the verifier rejecting a program is the correct
behaviour.
All of the miscompilation bugs depend on Ratte generating
programs that are also dynamically well-defined, computing
deterministic, well-defined results. Without such guarantees, there would be no way to know whether a mismatch
between the result of the “production” compilation stack
vs. the Ratte reference semantics is acceptable. With welldefined programs, such a difference is never acceptable.
The miscompilations triggered by buggy optimisations
(for instance, in Figure 2) could in principle be detected by
applying differential testing over optimisation passes on
Ratte-generated programs, i.e. without referencing the Ratte
semantics. However, they would still rely on the UB-free
property of the Ratte-generated programs.
In contrast, the miscompilations triggered by lowering cannot be detected by cross-optimisation level testing, because
the incorrect lowering is applied regardless of whether optimisations are executed. Detecting these bugs thus depends
on Ratte’s full power—its ability to generate well-defined
programs and to provide alternative, unambiguous reference
semantics for differential testing. Figure 12 is a reduced test
case found by Ratte, triggering a bug in the lowering of the
arith.floordivsi operation. The cause was an incorrect
implementation of the lowering pass for floordivsi, where
one of the intermediate values computed was −263 /−1. This
is a signed division overflow in the llvm target [21] and
introduced a poison value into the result.

