Ratte: Fuzzing for Miscompilations in Multi-Level Compilers Using Composable Semantics

class IntegerInterface T where
constanti_ :: Attribute -> T
addi_ :: (T, T) -> T
muli_ :: (T, T) -> T
muluiExtended_ :: (T, T) -> (T, T)
divsi_ :: (T, T) -> Nullable T
...
iTypeWidth :: T -> Int
zero :: Int -> T
class BoolIntegerInterface TI TB X where
adduiExtended_ :: (TI, TI) -> (TI, TB)
cmpi_ :: (Attribute, TI, TI) -> TB
select_ :: (TB, X, X) -> X
...
false :: TB
true :: TB

Figure 10. Interfaces for the integer type in Haskell-like
pseudocode, where class denotes an interface, T, TI, TB,
X all denote type variables, and m :: T denotes the type of the
method m is T. There is a distinction between the basic integer
interface, IntegerInterface, implemented by types such as
i1, i8, ..., index, and the interface for integer functions
that uses booleans, BoolIntegerInterface (TB parameter
satisfied by e.g. i1, and the TI parameter satisfied by standard
integer types e.g. i1, i8, ... index). Interfaces for types
contain all non-side-effecting computations on the type.

This allows semantics to be written that make the minimum
stipulation on the types combination, and make them usable
in all contexts where their required type is available.
Ratte treats types as an interface, and semantics are written
against the type’s interface rather than any concrete type implementations. Type interfaces contain all pure computations
that can be performed on the value of a type. For example,
some pure operations on the integer type are listed in Figure 10. Note that some pure operations make use of multiple
types (e.g. the cmpi, select operations uses an integer type,
and also another type that can be treated as a boolean), and
these are encoded as a multi-parameter interface. A combination of types is often used during interpretation, and the
values stored in the symbol table is a union of the types used.
Interactions Between Dialect Semantics. MLIR semantics can also interact, for instance by operations working on
values from multiple dialects (e.g. vector.print), regions that
contain code written in other dialects (e.g. linalg.generic,
scf.if, func.func), or specific conversions between types
(index to and from integer). Whilst the semantics of individual dialects can be unclear from the prose-based language
documentation, the interaction of semantics between different dialects is even less well specified. Through the Ratte
project, we developed a framework for specifying the semantics of dialects in terms of definitional interpreters. This

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

process distilled the types of interactions we encountered
and how these can be handled in a semantics framework.
Noninteracting Unions. This situation is when two dialects are used within the same IR layer, but are noninteracting in the sense that instances of operations in one dialect
do not use any values of the other dialect. In this case, no
extra work needs to be done to specify their interactions, as
the semantics of the dialects are independent.
Parameter Interfaces. Operations such as vector.print
can accept values from other dialects (i.e. outside of the
vector dialect). This interaction is handled by requiring types
usable by the operation to implement an operation-specific
interface. For vector.print, this would be an interface that
produces a string from the type, for printing.
Regions. Operations that contain regions, for example,
linalg.generic and func.func, interact with the semantics
of other dialects only implicitly by calling the region. The
parent operation treats the region as a black box and interacts
with the semantics of the region only through execution
and extraction of execution results. For instance, by calling
the region repeatedly on different arguments in the case of
linalg.generic, or by storing the continuation within the
state to be called later in the case of func.func. No additional
work is needed to specify the interactions of the semantics.
Specific Instances. Some operations act specifically between abstractions, for instance, the arith.index_cast operation converting between index and integer types. These
conversions have specific semantics and would need to be
done on a case-by-case basis through a specific interface
that bridges the two types. The interface specifies the two
types that are needed (e.g. one implementing the integer interface, the other implementing the index interface), and the
semantics is defined for the two types only. This is different
from parameter interfaces, as the interface is written for two
specific types, rather than one interface shared by all types.

3.3

Semantics-Guided Generators

Ratte generates programs in an incremental way. The generator (see point (1) on Figure 3) takes a source of randomness
(i.e. a pseudorandom number sequence), and the semantics
evaluated on the partially generated program (see point (2)
in Figure 3). The generator uses the semantic information
to inform its choices, and it is the generator’s responsibility
to ensure that the programs generated maintain necessary
invariants (e.g. the program being free from undesired behaviours).
Generators are structured to follow the syntax of the
IR [11], where an operation-generator instantiates its parameters and attributes randomly, and calls a region-generator
for its region(s); a region-generator chooses the scoping type
(Standard or IsolatedFromAbove) and calls a block-generator
for its blocks; finally, a block-generator chooses its name,
and calls an operation-generator for its body.

