Ratte: Fuzzing for Miscompilations in Multi-Level Compilers Using Composable Semantics

Type (Before)

FreshVar (Before)

...
%9 → i64

Next available:
%10

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Table 1. Table of embeddings for MLIR features (of the grammar in Figure 1) into a programming language supporting
effect libraries. The exception is Value, which is not a term
of the grammar, but is a synonym for operand and result
(following convention of the official documentation [27]).

Partial program
%10 = arith.constant true : i1
%11 = scf.if {
vector.print %10 : i1
%12 = arith.addi %11, %11 : i1

Type (After)

FreshVar (After)

...
%9 → i64
%10 → i1

Next available:
%13

Feature

Embedding

type
Value
operand
result
operation
region
block
attribute

Interface (as in Figure 10)
The Value’s ID and type (String, String)
Same as Value
Same as Value
Effect constructor
Funcs of type [Value] → Effect-AST
Labelled funcs (String, [Value] → Effect-AST)
Argument to effect constructor

%12 → i1

Figure 6. Two different dialect-agnostic semantics (value
types, and the next available value ID) evaluated on a generated partial program segment. In the value types example,
the scopes have Standard type.

the MLIR AST, as no dialect-specific information is involved
in these semantics (see point (4) on Figure 3). We give two
examples in Figure 6, showing different dialect-agnostic incremental semantics being evaluated on a generated (partial)
program segment. The type semantics, which track typing
information for each value, are updated to reflect the new
typing environment. The next-fresh variable tracker is updated to the next available name for a fresh ID.
3.2.2 Modular Dialect Semantics. Since MLIR is a modular IR, any semantics for MLIR also needs to be specified
modularly in order to support new dialects that can be defined by the user, without modifications to the semantics of
existing dialects. For example, although it would be possible
to write a function that interprets the string-based MLIR AST
directly, semantics for all supported operations would need
to be specified within this single monolithic interpretation
function. This would mean that changes to operations in
any dialect would require modifications of the monolithic
interpretation function. This would make the code for the
interpretation function difficult to scale and maintain. For
an extensible IR like MLIR, such a non-modular approach
would quickly become unmaintainable.
To define semantics modularly, Ratte makes use of effect
libraries based on algebraic effects [31]. Effect libraries facilitate the specification and interpretation of domain-specific
languages (DSLs). The constructs of a particular DSL are specified as an effect, analogous to an AST node. The semantics

are defined as transformations, or handlers, on the effectsbased AST (hereon referred to as the effects-AST ) representation of the DSL. This allows semantics to be defined modularly: the semantics can be defined for a single effect as a
handler, and then the handler can be used on any effects-AST
that contains the effect. To give an effects-AST semantics,
one can compose together multiple handlers that, together,
transforms the ASTs down to a value (with no effects remaining). Although the early implementation of effect libraries
has been in functional languages, they are not intrinsically
tied to functional programming, and effect libraries are also
available for imperative languages like C++ [10] and Java [3].
Embedding into Effects-AST. The first step to making
use of effect frameworks is to convert the string-based MLIR
AST into the effects-based one so that modular semantics
can be specified (see point (5) in Figure 3).
The specifics of such a conversion process are dependent
on the exact effect framework chosen. However, we will highlight several aspects of the conversion that would apply to
all embeddings of MLIR into any effect framework. The interested reader can refer to the associated source code [44] for
details on the implementation within the Polysemy effects
framework [23].
Effect frameworks allow DSLs to be defined modularly,
and we take advantage of this feature for MLIR.
An overview of the embeddings for MLIR features into
effect systems is shown in Table 1.
Each MLIR operation is embedded as an effect, with the
operation name as the effect constructor’s name, and the
operation arguments as the effect arguments. Operations
with assignments are embedded as effects that return a unit
value, and operations without assignments are embedded as
effects that return the output values. In Figure 7 and Figure 8,
we show examples embedding instances of arith.addi and
func.func operations within an effect system.

