ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Pingshi Yu, Nicolas Wu, and Alastair F. Donaldson

MLIR Embedding
%7 = arith.addi %5, %3 : i32
Func
func, call,
return, ...

Embed

Tensor
constant,
generate, ...

...

Arith.Addi ("7", "i32")
("5", "i32") ("3", "i32")

Interpreter Effects
Handle Arith
v1 = Read "5"
v2 = Read "3"
Assign "7" (addi_ v1 v2)

Figure 7. Embedding of an instance of arith.addi operation
as an effect, and the result of applying handlers (partial interpretation) on the effect embedding.
func.func @sq(%a : i64)
: i64 -> i64 {
%b = arith.muli %a, %a : i64
func.return %b : i64
}
Embed
Func.Func "sq" (𝜆 (a, "i64") →
Arith.Muli ("b", "i64")
(a, "i64") (a, "i64")
Func.Return ("b", "i64"))
Handle Func

AddFunc "sq" (𝜆 (a, "i64") →
Arith.Muli ("b", "i64")
(a, "i64") (a, "i64")
Func.Return ("b", "i64"))

Figure 8. Embedding of an instance of func.func operation
as an effect, and the result of the handler application on the
effect. The AddFunc effect stores the effect-AST, to be called
later with arguments via the CallFunc effect.

A region is embedded as a function that takes a number
of region arguments (arguments to the first block [27]) and
returns an effects-AST for the region’s body. A block is embedded as a labelled function from block arguments to the
effects-AST of its body. Terminator operations (block terminators) use function labels to dispatch calls to next blocks.
Since MLIR has a recursive structure between the operations, regions, and block constructs, embedding the AST
into the effects needs to be done recursively. The particular
conversion scheme used in Ratte proceeds in a depth-first
way (through the MLIR AST): for each operation, the converter is applied on any associated regions first, to obtain
their embeddings, before constructing the effect instance
using the region embeddings.
Modular Semantics on Effects-ASTs. We now illustrate
how MLIR semantics are evaluated by effect libraries through

Assignment
Assign, Read,
...

FuncTable
AddFunc,
CallFunc

...

Host Language
State
Read, Write, Modify, ...

Figure 9. Structure of effects-based interpreters for MLIR
programs. Each layer is an abstraction level in the interpreter,
and boxes represent a modular effect component, containing
the available operations for the component. The components
shown are for illustrative purposes, as the combination depend on the semantics supported. All stages are written using
the effect framework, and code produced in the final stage is
in the host language for execution.

several examples. Interpretation of the effects-AST can be
seen as transformations that convert the AST at a higher
level of abstraction into one at a lower level.
Once embedded as higher-level effects, interpretations
can be defined arbitrarily. Although other interpretations
are possible, Ratte primarily uses the concrete value interpretation to compute semantics used by the generator. The
interpreter converts the MLIR effects-AST into a lower-level
DSL, which contains assignment, error, scoping, function
table, and writer operations. These are then translated further to executable code (in the host language—in Ratte’s case
this is Haskell) that implements the semantics. To provide
concrete semantics for a dialect in this way, the user of Ratte
needs to provide function that transform the operations of
the dialect into the lower-level DSL. An overview of the main
stages of this interpretation is illustrated in Figure 9, along
with the operations available within each DSL component.
The lower-level DSL that MLIR dialects translate to is
not fixed, and the DSL combination is variable based on the
implementation needs of the higher-level semantics.
Dialects can introduce new types into the abstraction, and
an interpreter needs to know the combination of types used
to record their values during interpretation. However, to provide modular semantics, it is necessary to delay specifying
the concrete combination of types used as much as possible.

