ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

func.func @main() {
%n1 = arith.constant -1 : i1
%0 = call @one() : () -> i1
%low, %high = arith.mulsi_extended %0, %n1 : i1
vector.print %low : i1
vector.print %high : i1
return
}
func.func @one() -> i1 {
%n1 = arith.constant -1 : i1
return %n1 : i1
}

Figure 2. Example MLIR program using a combination of
func, arith, and vector dialects. This Ratte-discovered program that computes −1 × −1 revealed a miscompilation in
the production compiler, which evaluated to −1 rather than
1 due to its special treatment of 1-bit integers types (i1).

Ratte’s goal is to test the correctness of MLIR optimisations and lowerings passes by generating inputs for the MLIR
framework (MLIR programs) and using differential testing
to detect bugs. For programs to be usable for this purpose, in
addition to being syntactically correct according to Figure 1,
they must also respect the static constraints of the language
and must not trigger any dynamic undefined behaviours.
Altogether these constraints ensure a correct implementation will successfully compile the program, triggering passes
throughout the compilation stack, and yield an output that
can be used for differential testing.
As mentioned in Section 2, MLIR is an open ecosystem of
composable dialects. Each dialect introduces operations that
cover some abstraction domain and can impose constraints
on which programs have well-defined semantics. Since compiler engineers using MLIR can also introduce new dialects,
it is infeasible to create a fuzzer for the entirety of MLIR.
Therefore, Ratte is an extensible and composable framework
that allows generators of programs with well-defined semantics to be defined on a per-dialect basis. Generators for
multiple dialects can then be used together for the dialect
combination that the user requires.
For differential testing, there are a host of behaviours
that are undesirable, which we define here as one of two
things. First, explicit undefined behaviours, which make any
compilation trivially correct. Second, behaviours that make
it challenging to work with a differential testing oracle, such
as non-deterministic behaviours, compile-time rejections or
runtime crashes.2

2 In principle it is possible to use differential testing to check that two com-

pilers produce comparable error messages, or generate code that produces
comparable runtime error messages when crashes occur during execution,
but this is not the focus of our work.

Pingshi Yu, Nicolas Wu, and Alastair F. Donaldson

To avoid generating these undesirable programs, Ratte
keeps track of semantic information evaluated on the program during generation. Figure 4 shows some examples of
undesirable behaviours introduced by various dialects, and
the semantic information required to avoid generating programs that trigger the undefined behaviours.
Whilst it is possible to apply rejection sampling based on
the grammar of MLIR, by generating ASTs of MLIR programs
and rejecting those that contain undesirable behaviours, the
process would be very inefficient. This is because a vanishingly small percentage of programs following the grammar
would be free from such behaviours, resulting in a large
amount of time wasted on generation.
An overview of Ratte is shown in Figure 3, and we refer back to components of the figure throughout this section. Ratte constructs programs incrementally, alternating
between generation and semantic evaluation/analysis. Incremental semantics (Section 3.1) is used in the generation loop
to efficiently evaluate a partially generated program, yielding information that will guide future generation choices. In
order to evaluate the semantics in a modular way, the expression problem [40] needs to be addressed. Ratte uses effect
systems [31] for this purpose and embeds the MLIR syntax
using an effects-based AST for modular semantic evaluation
and analysis (Section 3.2). Generators rely on the semantics
of the partial program to inform future choices, in order to
avoid making choices that lead to programs with undesirable
behaviours (Section 3.3). At the end of generation, Ratte also
appends code that produces output by printint the values of
certain program variables, which allows generated programs
to be used to detect bugs via differential testing (Section 3.4).

3.1

Generation Principles

As mentioned before, Ratte incrementally generates programs to avoid rejection sampling whenever possible, evaluating partial programs during generation to derive information for future generation steps. Each step randomly extends
the partial program, and keeps the evaluated information
up to date with the extended partial program. For efficiency,
evaluating partial programs should also be incremental, in
that evaluating an extension to a partial program should not
require re-evaluating the entire partial program.
Similar design choices are also made in other program
generators such as YARPGen [18] and Csmith [43], which
use this observation implicitly. They generate incrementally
as much as possible, falling back to rejection sampling for
instances where the desired property is not straightforwardly
incremental, like undefined-behaviour-free loops.
To make the concepts discussed above concrete, we give
definitions for partial programs (what Ratte processes during
generation), their extensions (how Ratte modifies programs),
and evaluations that can be defined on partial programs
(information used to decide on next generation steps).

