ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

can interact when composed, and existing documentation
on the semantics of dialect interactions is even less wellspecified than that of individual dialects. This is a problem
because MLIR-based compilers almost always use IR consisting of multiple dialects [37–39], and thus understanding the
semantics of dialect compositions is important.
Challenge 2: Generating effective test programs. Even
if clear semantics are available, a compiler still needs to be
thoroughly validated against the semantics. Differential testing [25] is a standard approach for validating compiler correctness. It uses either multiple compiler implementations or
multiple configurations of a single compiler (e.g. at different
optimisation levels) to compile the same program, followed
by executing and comparing the outputs of the resulting
executables. Any unexpected output differences indicate that
at least one of the compilers or compiler configurations has
not compiled the program correctly.
However, putting differential testing into practice for MLIR
is challenging for two main reasons. First, it is unlikely
that multiple implementations of MLIR will be available
for cross-checking, as MLIR is a unifying compiler framework intended to be reused. Applying differential testing
across different optimisation levels will not reliably find errors in lowering passes, as all compilation paths go through
the same lowering steps. Secondly, effective differential testing requires a large number of high quality inputs—diverse
programs that produce well-defined results. Such input programs are non-trivial to generate. This is already a challenge
for traditional programming languages [43], and the open
ecosystem of MLIR only adds to the difficulty. The MLIR
framework covers a large and ever-growing family of dialects. Each abstraction can introduce new syntactic and
semantic restrictions that program generators must account
for to generate programs suitable for differential testing.
Challenge 3: Scaling compiler validation to dialect combinations. Whilst it would be possible in principle to build
a custom program generator for any MLIR dialect combination of interest, treating each combination as an individual
language, such an approach would be very costly in terms of
human effort, since their shared features mean many domainspecific generation techniques and analyses [18, 19, 32, 43]
would have to be repeated for each dialect combination.
Sharing fuzzer code for different languages is an open
problem in compiler fuzzing, where existing fuzzers are
tightly coupled to one language [43] (or family of languages
in similar domains [18]), and not easily adaptable to other
languages [5]. Since MLIR is a unifying composable IR shared
by different compilers, composably fuzzing the MLIR framework is both a challenge and an exciting opportunity to enable code-sharing between fuzzers. This requires a general
framework allowing generators, analyses and test oracles to
be defined in a modular fashion for dialects, and reused in
program generators for dialect combinations.

Pingshi Yu, Nicolas Wu, and Alastair F. Donaldson

Our work. To address the above challenges, we present a
general method for specifying both semantics of dialects
through composable interpreters, and composable generators (fuzzers) that are enhanced by utilising semantic information during program generation. Our method is inspired
by the previous approach taken by YARPGen [18] for C-like
languages, where a fuzzer is co-developed with an interpreter.
The interpreter is executed in-step with program generation
to ensure that the values of variables at all program points are
known. Our method generalises the YARPGen approach to
composable languages and allows for different analyses to be
written for the language and used by the fuzzer during generation. Like the initial YARPGen approach [18], our approach
is limited to generation of loop-free programs, which makes
it possible to accurately track values of program variables
during generation. Despite this limitation, we still test compilation of certain MLIR looping constructs by generating
higher-level operations that are lowered into loops.
We enable a harmonious cycle for developing validated
semantics for dialects, continuously cross-checking the semantics against existing compiler implementations using
our fuzzer, in combination with static unit tests. Using the
semantics, we create the first generators of deterministic,
well-defined programs for MLIR-based compilers, to be used
in end-to-end testing. Importantly, this allows deeper bugs,
such as miscompilations, to be detected, which is not possible
with the current state-of-the-art MLIR testing tools [34, 41].
Our framework handles the challenges of composable semantics and fuzzing by leveraging techniques such as effect
systems [12, 42] for addressing the expression problem [40]
when describing compositional semantics for programming
languages, and QuickCheck style property-based testing libraries [7] for writing composable program generators. We
have implemented our ideas in a practical tool, called Ratte.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of Ratte on key MLIR
dialects, finding 8 previously-unknown bugs during end-toend testing of dialect implementations—of which 4 have been
confirmed and 3 fixed. In particular, 6 out of 8 bugs are miscompilations, which are difficult to detect and are beyond the
scope of existing works on MLIR compiler testing. During
the development of the framework, we also contributed to
the MLIR specification by identifying ambiguities and inconsistencies in the documentation, which led to clarifying
changes to the specification.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• A framework for describing MLIR dialect semantics
modularly via composable interpreters (Section 3.2).
• A general approach for constructing modular and composable fuzzers for MLIR, using semantic information
to allow the generation of undefined-behaviour free
programs (Section 3.3).
• The first fuzzers for generating well-defined MLIR programs of several key MLIR dialects (Section 3.5).

