PartIR: Composing SPMD Partitioning Strategies for Machine Learning


   As in Figure 13, the interpretations of yield and let are standard. Unlike in PartIR:Core, however, yield and let expressions
in PartIR:SPMD may involve tuples. Specifically, yield may return a tuple of values, and let may bind a tuple of values.
Hence, the subexpression 𝑒 in a let expression isninterpreted in an extension
                                                                          o      of the environment 𝛾 that includes a mapping for
                                                              spmd
each of the variable names in 𝑥, as indicated by 𝑥 ↦→ ⟦Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝜇⟧ 𝛾 at the bottom of Figure 17.
   We discuss the remaining interpretations in the bottom pane of Figure 17, i.e. the interpretations of PartIR:SPMD values,
from top down.
   The spmd.execute instruction introduces stacked axes 𝑎 into its result type. Based on our interpretation of distributed types,
an spmd.execute instruction must therefore be interpreted as a function. The body of this function is the interpretation of the
subexpression 𝑒; but note that 𝑒 is interpreted as a PartIR:Core expression, in a suitable typing context 𝑟, 𝑦:𝜏. This interpretation
of 𝑒 is guaranteed to be meaningful by the premises of the typing rule TExec from Figure 14.
   The interpretation of an spmd.tile_reduce instruction with a #sum⟨a⟩ action is straightforward. We sum over an index 𝑗
that takes values in ⟦𝑎⟧, where 𝑎 is the last of the stacked axes.
   Applying a #tile⟨a, d⟩ action is even simpler, thanks to our choice of assigning the same function space interpretation
to both a type with only stacked axes and a type that has a single axis occurring in a distributed dimension: we only use
slightly different notation for these function spaces, by annotating the final arrow with a superscript 𝑑 if an axis occurs in
a distributed dimension. Accordingly, we write the result of interpreting a #tile⟨a, d⟩ action as a function with a final 𝜆𝑑 ,
where the superscript 𝑑 is merely a notational reminder that the corresponding arrow also carries 𝑑 as an annotation.
   The interpretation of spmd.redistribute in Figure 17 is only given for the situation where spmd.redistribute acts as an
all_gather operation along axis 𝑎. This is in fact the only kind of spmd.redistribute instruction that will be needed for
our correctness proof of the translations from PartIR:Core to PartIR:SPMD. When spmd.redistribute acts as an all_gather
                                                                           in the interpretation of spmd.redistribute in Figure 17.
                                                                  É𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑠=𝑑
operation, it performs a concatenation of tiles; hence the use of
Note that because of
                                                     Γ ⊢spmd 𝑥 : dtensor⟨𝑎, 𝜌⟩ and
                                                     𝜌 = [𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑑 −1, {𝑎}𝑛𝑑 , 𝑛𝑑+1, . . . , 𝑛𝑟 ] ,
the index 𝑗 is necessarily passed as an argument to a 𝜆𝑑 .
  Lastly, we discuss the interpretation in PartIR:SPMD of operations 𝑜𝑝 that are inherited from StableHLO. In a PartIR:SPMD
program, an operation 𝑜𝑝 can either appear at top level or nested under an spmd.execute instruction. When 𝑜𝑝 is nested under
spmd.execute, its interpretation in PartIR:SPMD is, by definition, identical to its interpretation in PartIR:Core (see the equation
for spmd.execute in Figure 17). When an 𝑜𝑝 appears at top level, it neither consumes nor produces values that have stacked
axes in their distributed types. This is why, in Figure 17, we restrict interpretations of typing judgements for 𝑜𝑝 to cases where
the resulting type is of the form dtensor⟨·, 𝑛⟩, i.e. has no stacked axes.
   A note on slice. The slice instruction from PartIR:Core is also valid in PartIR:SPMD (cf. the definitions of values in
PartIR:SPMD in Figure 14). Note that slice instructions require an argument 𝑟 𝑎 that is a range variable. This is why, in a
well-typed PartIR:SPMD program, a slice instruction can only appear in the body of an spmd.execute.5 Since the body of an
spmd.execute instruction is interpreted with the PartIR:Core semantics, Figure 17 does not include an explicit interpretation
for slice instructions.

C.3    Lowering PartIR:Core to PartIR:SPMD
Lowering PartIR:Core to PartIR:SPMD is essentially a matter of translating loop instructions to spmd.execute instructions,
with the main complication being the need to flatten nested loop structures. Our translation M; 𝜎 ⊢ ⟨C; 𝑒⟩ ⇝ 𝑒 ′ , defined in
Figure 18, deals with this complication by keeping track of (a) the nesting level 𝜎 of loop instructions and (b) local definitions
C in the PartIR:Core source program.
C.3.1 Overview of the translation relation. The relation M; 𝜎 ⊢ ⟨C; 𝑒⟩ ⇝ 𝑒 ′ specifies when a PartIR:Core expression
C[𝑒] lowers to the PartIR:SPMD expression 𝑒 ′ , in the presence of M and 𝜎. C is a simple context, defined towards the bottom
of Figure 18, that records the definitions of local variables that are in scope for 𝑒. Here, local means that the path from the
definition of a variable in C to its use in 𝑒 does not cross any loop instructions. The sequence 𝜎 indicates the nesting level
at which C[𝑒] appears in the full source program. Note that the 𝜎 keep track not only of the axes spanned by a loop nest
enclosing C[𝑒], but also of the corresponding loop actions. Lastly, the map M, defined towards the bottom of Figure 18, records
the names and types 𝑥:𝜏 of variables that are in scope for C[𝑒] in the full source program. The names in the domain of M
5 Note that PartIR:SPMD typing contexts Γ do not include range variables.

                                                                              27
