Sami Alabed, Daniel Belov, Bart Chrzaszcz, Juliana Franco, Dominik Grewe, Dougal Maclaurin, James Molloy, Tom Natan, Tamara Norman, Xiaoyue Pan,
                         Adam Paszke, Norman A. Rink, Michael Schaarschmidt, Timur Sitdikov, Agnieszka Swietlik, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, and Joel Wee

A.3.1 Runtime estimation. First, we look at the difference between the estimated and actual runtime for the various
strategies described in the paper. Figure 9 shows the difference between the estimated and actual measured seconds on
hardware. First, we notice that the error is within acceptable range (sub milliseconds) for specific configurations, especially for
GNS and UNET. The simulator underestimated T32’s most complicated strategy by 3 seconds at the worst case; these often
can be attributed to the layout pass of XLA and XLA optimization. IT32, on the other hand, the simulator overestimated its
runtime (meaning we thought it would be slower than it is); this is due to the key-value caching optimization we implemented
in the model; without caching, the numbers are much closer to the T32 error range. Overall, both automatic tools and human
users use the estimated runtime as a proxy for relative improvement of applying the sharding strategy rather than absolute
value estimates.
   Absolute value estimates require a learned cost model that learns what the backend compiler optimizer will do, different
network topology profiles, and various specialized ops performances (e.g., caching). Improving the simulator is beyond the
scope of our work, but PartIR allows the end to plug in any simulator, and we are currently looking into a learned cost model
for this exact reason.


                                                                         Model: IT32                  Model: T32                       Model: GNS            Model: UNet
                     Measured runtime - estimated runtime in seconds




                                                                                                                             0.050
                                                            25




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                             0.025
                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                    0.04
                                                                                       1
                                                            15




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                       2
                                                            10




                                                                                                                             0.025




                                                                                                                                                    0.02
                                                              5




                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                             0.050
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                             P+Z3



                                                                                                                    MB+Z3




                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                          AllAuto
                                                                                Q

                                                                                P
                                                                          BP+MP




                                                                                                        AllAuto




                                                                                                                                         AllAuto



                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                               P


                                                                                                                                                            AllAuto

                                                                                                                                                           BP+Auto
                                                                                                                                                             BP+Z3
                                                                                                                                                             BP+Z2
                                                                              MP




                                                                                                                                              ES




                                                                                                                                                                 BP
                                                                       BP+AutoM




                                                                                                                                     ES+AutoM
                                                                                                                                     ES+AutoB
                                                                                                                                      ES+MP_E
                                                                       BP+MP+M




                                                                                           BP+AutoM



                                                                                                                  BP+MP+E




                                                                                                                            Strategy

    Figure 9. PartIR’s simulator runtime estimation compared to the actual measured runtime, in seconds, closer to the zero better.


A.3.2 Memory estimation. Related to runtime estimation is memory estimation; this is more important for automatic
tools to learn if any proposed solution does not fit in the given device specification. We implement a live range analysis of a
tensor usage in a given SPMD context at the PartIR:HLO level, where we follow a tensor as long as it is being used; we also
implement a simple fusion heuristic that will predict what the backend compiler will do to the tensor. The results are shown
in Figure 10. Here, we can see the results are much closer to 0 (i.e., no error); often, we prefer to over-estimate the memory
usage to discourage solutions close to the boundaries. XLA and other backend compilers have specialized optimization when a
model is on the boundaries - such as remating parts of the computation or reducing the fusion of ops. The simulator forces the
automatic partitioners to avoid these regions and focus on models that fit comfortably, not to kick off aggressive memory
optimization from the backend compiler.
A.3.3 Partitioning time. We showed the partitioning time of manual partitioning tactics in Section 7.5; here, we show
the time it takes to run AutomaticPartition. AutomaticPartition tactic depends on the algorithm implementation used for the
search; we implemented an algorithm similar to the one described in [2, 54]. As PartIR is agnostic to the optimization algorithm,
we are looking at different algorithms to implement, such as ILP solvers or RL-based solutions. Different algorithms have
different search profiles, and naturally, by increasing the number of axes (and, as a result, the number of available decisions to
                                                                                                                            18
