ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

2.3

Opportunities

1) The exploration mechanism could be more efficient. Table
1 shows the costs of tuning a subset of DNNs on NVIDIA
Jetson Orin with Ansor [50], illustrating space exploration
with learned cost model’s time occupies nearly 40%. The
occupied time will increase when applying a more complex
cost model. The exploration mechanism is expensive, due to
extracting all explored tensor programs’ features and feeding
them to the learned cost model during each search round.
Table 1. Tuning costs (min) for Ansor with 2,000 trials on
Orin, which means the time cost for space exploration, model
training, and kernel hardware measurement, respectively.
Ansor

R50 [18]

DeTR [8]

I-V3 [35]

Exploration
Training
Measurement

35
5.4
44.4

30.31
5.6
50.61

41.8
5.5
49.4

In light of this, can we develop a simple draft model to
roughly estimate performance, enabling an efficient "Draftthen-Verify" exploration mechanism? Specifically, during
the search phase, the draft model can quickly filter potential
small-scale candidates, avoiding reliance on a complex and
slow model. The learned cost model is then used only to
verify and identify the optimal tensor program from these
small-scale candidates rather than all explored candidates,
greatly reducing inference overhead. Since tensor program
performance aligns with the accelerator’s hierarchical parallel units, we can design an empirical formula cost model
as a draft model for initial exploration and draft small-scale
candidates as input for the learned cost model’s output. This
approach minimizes overhead and GPU usage.
2) Lack of easy-extraction and -training feature for deep
learning-based cost model. Recent works [4, 45, 51] have
demonstrated that deep learning-based cost models perform
far better than other methods. However, they rely on complex
expert feature engineering. TLP applies a Transformer-based
model to capture the relation between temporal schedule
primitives. The TLP model encodes schedule primitives using one-hot features, meaning that only a small portion of
the feature vector (e.g., split factors) varies between different
tensor programs—such as the differences are confined to only
1.387% of the feature values in the case of a GEMM. This lack
of diversity in the feature vectors makes it difficult to train
the transformer model effectively on a small dataset. In our
experiments (§6.1), the TLP model fine-tuned on the target
platform occasionally crashed, leading to tuning failures and
the disappearance of the tuning curve.
Given this, can we design a temporal feature that ensures
the distinction between features of different tensor programs
while accurately reflecting their behavior? We think of the
tensor program as a dataflow pipeline across hierarchical

Liang Qiao et al.

memory levels, encoding each data movement block into
features that reflect corresponding computations, memory
accesses, etc. Every value is related to its corresponding
tensor program to ensure distinction and ease of training.
3) Lack of effort-free adaptation strategy for deep learningbased cost model. Some works [49, 51] introduce distillation or
transfer learning to address cross-platform online unawareness. However, these approaches require additional effort to
complete the transfer tasks. Moses needs extra evaluation
of the distillation process and TenSet additionally trains a
local model to predict the gap, resulting in twice inference
overhead. We introduce a momentum adaptation strategy
compatible with any learned cost model, requiring no extra
transfer overhead.

3

System Design

Figure 2 shows the system overview of Pruner, which is
a "Draft-then-Verify" exploration mechanism that accelerates the schedule search process. Pruner takes a DNN as
input and converts it to partitioned small subgraphs using
graph partitioning algorithm [11]. Algorithm 1 details the
full graph tuning using MoA-Pruner. Pruner uses Ansor’s
gradient-based task scheduler [50] to tune these subgraphs
over multiple rounds, with each round independently selecting one subgraph according to tuning record (R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 ) (line 8).
Pruner has two major components for "Draft" and "Verify", respectively: (1) latent schedule explorer (LSE) and (2) patternaware cost model (PaCM). One key challenge Pruner has to
address is introducing a naive draft model to estimate performance roughly for rapid exploration. LSE (§4.1) designs the
hardware-aware symbols and penalties to describe the utilization of hardware performance across different memory

Deep Neural Networks
Tuning Scheduler
Sec 3

Graph Partition

Gradient-based Task Scheduler
Schedule Generation

Sec 4.1

Draft: Latent Schedule Explorer
Hardware-aware Symbols

Symbol-based Analyzer
Drafted candidates

Sec 4.2

Sec 4.3

Verify: Pattern-aware Cost Model
Temporal Dataflow Pattern

Pattern-aware Transformer

Momentum online Adaptation
Optimal Tensor Program

Figure 2. The system overview of Pruner, which contains
latent schedule explorer and pattern-aware cost model. Momentum online adaptation is only activated for MoA-Pruner
in online cost model tuning scenarios.

