Pruner: A Draft-then-Verify Exploration Mechanism to Accelerate Tensor Program Tuning

With the hardware-aware penalty terms P𝑙𝑖,∗ , SA can easily derive the performance of a schedule. First, SA extracts
the hardware utilization for each innermost statement in
tensor programs. For computation-related statements, the
utilization (𝑈𝑝 ) of the hardware’s theoretical peak performance (𝑇𝑝 ) can be estimated across different level penalty
Î
terms P𝑙𝑖,𝑐 , deriving as 𝑈𝑝 = 𝑇𝑝 · 𝑙𝑖 P𝑙𝑖,𝑐 . For example, given
a schedule with six scheduling blocks and hardware with
four parallel units at 𝑙𝑖 level, the utilized performance can
be estimated as 0.75 · 𝑇𝑃 . To simplify the assessment (𝑈𝑚 ) of
memory bandwidth (𝑇𝑚 ), we only consider the L2 storage
level, which has the highest latency, and incorporate the
Î
lower-level penalties as 𝑈𝑚 = 𝑇𝑚 · 𝑙𝑖 P𝑙𝑖,𝑚 . Second, SA can
estimate the computation and memory access latency of each
innermost statement according to the Eq. 1, obtaining the
total latency 𝐿𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 of each tensor program, where 𝑆8 and 𝑆5
(see Hardware-aware Symbols) denote the number of float
operators and the actual memory access of 𝑖-th statement.
𝐿𝑐𝑖 =
4.2

∑︁
𝑆8
𝑆5
𝑖
𝑖
(𝐿𝑐𝑖 + 𝐿𝑚
)
, 𝐿𝑚
=
, 𝐿𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 =
𝑈𝑝
𝑈𝑚
𝑖

(1)

Verify: Pattern-aware Cost Model

After generating the S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 by Latent Schedule Explorer (§4.1),
the next goal of Pruner is to build an efficient and accurate cost model to identify the optimal tensor program. The
current mainstream approach is to use a trained machine
learning or deep learning model as the cost model. Apart
from the different models used (such as XGBoost [10] and
MLP), the primary distinction among these methods lies
in the definition and extraction of program features. AutoTVM [12] aims to extract features from each loop variable, while Ansor [50] and TenSetMLP [51] leverage the
features of the innermost statements. However, feature designs specified to the single variable or statement fail to
adequately characterize the behaviors of tensor programs,
leading to limited performance. In addition to feature design, TLP [45] uses a Transformer-based model to predict
the performance of schedule primitives. However, training
this model requires a large external dataset and significant
computational resources for inference. We observe an insight that the multi-tiling pattern recurs in different tensor
programs, representing the dataflow process between hierarchical memory. Pruner designs a Pattern-aware Cost Model
(PaCM), including the temporal dataflow feature recognition
across hierarchical memory and a resource-efficient Transformer model. Therefore, we attempt to define the temporal dataflow features of tensor programs as complementary
to the naive statement features for further enhancing the
prediction accuracy of the cost model. Specifically, we extract critical dataflow and their features from the low-level
intermediate representation (IR) of tensor programs using
the multi-tiling pattern, then design a multi-branch Patternaware Transformer to learn the modeling these serialized

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

dataflow features and the mapping from features to performance, as shown in Figure 4.
Feature Representation. Most tensor programs consist of
nested loops with assignment statements, aiming to apply the
multi-level tiling rules to improve data reuse and computational performance. As illustrated in Figure 4 bottom, we first
abstract a multi-tiling pattern covering multi-level buffers
across different memory levels (e.g., register, shared, and
global memory in GPUs), to extract the data block movement
process with temporal information from tensor programs.
Then, Pruner treats statements as temporal dataflow blocks
across hierarchical-level memory and encodes behaviors involving different buffers separately into a 23-dimensional
embedding vector to define the dataflow features of each tensor program. For example in Figure 4 bottom, the statement
(𝐶.𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑐𝑙 ← 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝐴.𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑, 𝐵.𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑)) covers three data
block movements. Each data block’s characteristics include
memory accesses(e.g., data reuse, access stride, access type),
allocation sizes, flow direction (e.g., L2->L1), and computation density, etc. Those values will be calculated based on
the buffer information and for-loops bound to them. Given
that the multi-tiling pattern in different programs shares the
same data movement process except for values, the resulting
structured features facilitate the convergence of subsequent
cost models. Element-wise operators don’t require tiling to
improve data reuse, for which tiling templates cannot capture dataflow characteristics. Besides, Pure element-wise
operators accounting for less than 3% (based on the TenSet),
are typically fused into tiled operators in DNNs. Therefore
we apply a zero-padding simply for element-wise op’s features, requiring no additional computational overhead. Finally, combining the statement-level features provided by
Ansor, we construct a hybrid feature to describe the behavior
of the tensor program.

Transformed Program:
block_parallel I_J_0 in (0, I0*J0):
thread_parallel I_J_1 in (0, I1*J1):
for v in (0, V): // vthread
C.local = 0.0;
for k0 in (0, K0):
A.shared = A;
B.shared = B;
for k1, i3, j3 in grid(K1, I3, J3):
for k2, i4, j4 in grid(K2, I4, J4):
C.local += A.shared * B.shared;
for i5, j5 in grid(I3*I4, J3*J4):
D = max(C.local, 0.0);

Multi-Tiling Pattern
#1: C.local = 0.0
#2 & 3: A.shared, B.shared
A, B // L2 to L1
#4: C.local
Compute(A.shared, B.shared) // L1 to L0
#5: D
Elemwise(C.local)
// L0 to L2

Pattern-aware Transformer:
Multi-Tiling Pattern Extraction

Temporal
Data Flow

Statement
Feature

Linear * 3

Linear * 3

Attention

Concat

output

Linear * 3

Temporal Data Flow Feature
(compute:1|mem access:21| alloc size:1)

C.local; A.global; ...;
C.local: (2, 128, 128, 32, ...)
......;
D.global: (0, 1024, ...) // Dim(10,23)

Figure 4. (top) The pipeline of Pattern-aware Cost Model;
(bottom) Extraction of temporal dataflow feature.

