Pruner: A Draft-then-Verify Exploration Mechanism to Accelerate Tensor Program Tuning

Algorithm 1: Full Graph Tuning using MoA-Pruner
Input:
𝑃 : partitioned subgraph set
2 𝑑: device abstraction
3 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠: number of rounds of tuning among all subgraphs
4 𝐶 𝑀𝑜𝐴 : pre-trained cross-platform cost model
Output: S𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
5 Func 𝑇𝑢𝑛𝑒𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑙𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ(𝑃 , 𝑑, 𝐶 𝑀𝑜𝐴 ):
6
R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 ← ∅, 𝐶𝑃𝑎𝑇 ← 𝐶𝑀𝑜𝐴 ;
7
for 𝑖 ← 1 to 𝑛𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠
8
𝑝 0 ← 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒𝑟 (𝑃, R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 );
9
S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ← 𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑟 (𝑝 0 , 𝑑 );
10
S𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑓 𝑡 ← S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ∪ 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ (𝑝 0 );
11
S𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑃𝑎𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 (𝐶𝑃𝑎𝑇 , S𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑓 𝑡 );
12
R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 ∪ {𝑝 0 : S𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 };
13
𝐶𝑃𝑎𝑇 , 𝐶𝑀𝑜𝐴 ← 𝑈 𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑀𝑜𝐴 (𝐶𝑀𝑜𝐴 , R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 );
14
S𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 ← 𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒𝑠 ( R𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 );
15
return S𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 ;
1

layers. LSE then introduces a symbol-based analyzer, an empirical formula cost model, and uses it to draft the small-scale
candidates as an input (S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ) for the learned cost model during space exploration (line 9). To ensure some randomness,
Pruner partially samples from the initial schedule space (line
10). The next challenge is to identify the best (S𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 )
from small-scale draft candidates (S𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑓 𝑡 ). PaCM (§4.2) explores temporal dataflow feature, which is easy-extraction
and -training for the transformer-based cost model, as a complement to naive statement-level features and designs the
pattern-aware transformer, a multi-branch cost model, for
accurate performance prediction (line 11). Then measure
and update the tuning record (line 12). Finally, MoA-Pruner
proposes a momentum online adaptation (MoA) strategy
(§4.3), introducing an online Siamese model to address the
cross-platform online unawareness for online cost model
tuning scenarios (line 13).

4

Pruner

4.1

Draft: Latent Schedule Explorer

During the search process, our primary objective is to employ an efficient draft model for the rapid schedule space
exploration. We observe that tensor program performance
on hardware aligns with the hierarchical parallel units of
the accelerator. To design an efficient empirical formula cost
model (draft model), we focus on quantitatively analyzing
the impact of these assignments of schedule primitives on
performance. Pruner introduces Latent Schedule Explorer
(LSE). LSE formulates the search process as a hardware fitness optimization problem, relying on the draft model rather
than the learned cost model.
Algorithm 2 details how Pruner constructs a small-scale
schedule candidate set (S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ) during LSE. The inputs to
the explorer include the subgraph 𝑝 0 , the corresponding
computation graph (i.e., DAG), and the device abstraction.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

First, Pruner forms the schedule space (𝜃 𝑥 ) using schedule
generation rules [50] and randomly samples a set of initial
schedules (S𝑥 ) on lines 13 and 14. Lines 16 to 21 introduce a
draft model (Symbol-based Analyzer), which runs for nSteps
to optimize the hardware fitness scores. Each step estimates
the performance of the current value S𝑥 using hardwareaware symbols and Symbol-based Analyzer (lines 5 to 11).
Then Pruner uses a genetic algorithm (GA) to update S𝑥 in
each step (line 21). GA explores tiling-factor transformations
for for-loops, with a fitness function using the draft model’s
estimated performance to guide the mutation. Finally, Pruner
outputs the S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 with the highest hardware fitness scores.
Algorithm 2: Latent Schedule Explorer
Input:
𝑝 0 : subgraph to be optimized
2 𝑑: device abstraction
3 𝑛𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠: number of steps to run GA
4 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 : Symbol-based Analyzer
Output: S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 , 𝜃 𝑥
5 Func 𝐶𝑆𝐴 (𝑠𝑐ℎ, d):
6
𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑠 ← ∅, 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 ← 0;
7
for 𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑡 ∈ 𝜏(𝑝 0 , 𝑠𝑐ℎ).bufferStmt
8
for 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙 ∈ ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒_𝑎𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒_𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑠
9
𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑠.append(𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙(𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑡 ));
10
𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠, 𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ←
ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒_𝑎𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒_𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡 𝑦 (𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑠, 𝑑 );
11
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 ← 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 (𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑠);
12
return 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 ;
13 Func 𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑟 (𝑝 0 , 𝑑):
14
𝜃 𝑥 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑆𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐ℎ (𝑝 0 );
15
S𝑥 ← 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑆𝑐ℎ (𝜃 𝑥 );
16
S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ← ∅;
17
for 𝑖 ← 1 to 𝑛𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠
18
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 ← ∅;
19
for 𝑠𝑐ℎ ∈ S𝑥
20
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 ← 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 ∪ (𝑠𝑐ℎ, 𝐶𝑆𝐴 (𝑠𝑐ℎ, 𝑑 ) );
21
S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 ← 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝐹𝑖𝑙𝑡𝑒𝑟 ( S𝑥 ∪ S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 , 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 );
22
S𝑥 ← 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑀𝑢𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ( S𝑥 , 𝜃 𝑥 , 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠 );
23
return S𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 , 𝜃 𝑥 ;
1

Hardware-aware Symbols. Based on the common characteristics of generated schedule primitives, Pruner extracts
hardware-aware symbols to describe the program’s behaviors in hierarchical memory. Table 2 presents hardwareaware symbols generated based on schedule primitives. Concretely, Symbols 1 and 3 count the allocation of L0 and
Table 2. Hardware-aware symbols and related memory level.
Mem

Symbol

L0
L1

S1-L0MemAlloc, S2-L0CompCount
S3-L1MemAlloc, S4-L1ParaInfo
S5-L2MemFootprint, S6-L2ParaInfo
S7-L2TransDim, S8-L2CompCount

L2

