ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Ruihang Lai et al.
def main(x: Tensor(("n", 128), "f32"), w: Tensor((128, 256), "f32")):
n = sym_var()
with dataflow():
lv0: Tensor((n, 256), "f32") = call_tir(
mm, [x, w], Tensor((n, 256),"f32")
)
lv1: Tensor((n, 256), "f32") = rms_norm(lv0)

partial accumulation results into an intermediate global memory buffer, which is then consumed and accumulated by the
second phase. As shown in Figure 11, We can detect such
global memory allocation in tensor programs from analysis
feedback, and jointly rewrite the tensor program and the
graph-level caller site to lift the allocation to graph level.
Importantly, the lifted allocation can be planned by the memory planning in §4.3, which further increases the overall
memory reuse. This optimization is only possible with the
cross-level abstractions when the shape relation is preserved
throughout all cross-level transformations in Relax, and the
optimization opportunities for planning such memory reuse
may not arise in the traditional single-shot lowering flow.

I. Replacement from composable
partial lowering passes
lv1: Tensor((n, 256), "f32") = call_dps_library(
"cutlass.rms_norm", [lv0], Tensor((n, 256), "f32")
)
...
II. Loop-level TensorIR optimization
@tensorir_function
def mm(X: Buffer(("n", 128) "f32"),
W: Buffer((128, 256), "f32"),
TensorIR function body
Y: Buffer(("n", 256), "f32")):
n = sym_var()
for i, j, k in grid(n, 256, 128):
Program analysis and
with block():
with init():
transformations
Y[i, j] = 0
Y[i, j] += X[i, k] * W[k, j] update

4.5 CUDA Graph Offloading
CUDA Graph [21] is an optimization that reduces GPU kernel launch overhead at the GPU driver level and thereby
improve the overall system performance. It works by capturing multiple GPU kernel launches and then replaying them as
a group, rather than launching individual kernels separately.
To replay captured kernel launches, the GPU driver requires
the all global memory accessed by the kernels to be constantsized and statically allocated ahead of capturing. This poses a
significant challenge for applying CUDA Graph to dynamicshape ML models. With static memory planning, Relax can
pre-allocate all memory statically, even for dynamic-shaped
tensors. We build a pass to analyze the computational graph
and lift subgraphs that meet CUDA Graph conditions into
subgraph function after memory planning. The pass inserts
runtime builtin functions that handle CUDA Graph capture
or replay for these offloaded subgraph functions. At runtime,
only the first run of a subgraph function triggers CUDA
Graph capture; subsequent runs automatically replay the
captured CUDA Graph. Through these, we extend CUDA
Graph, typically available only for static models, to a broad
range of dynamic workloads. We can generally apply the
principle of the graph offloading optimization to any GPU
backend that supports static execution graphs in the future.

Optimized function body

Figure 12. Tensor operator optimization examples.
Partial Library Lowering (§4.5)
Operator to Tensor Program Lowering (§4.6)
Dynamic Shape–Aware Operator Fusion (§4.1)

Cross-level optims

Tensor Program Optimizations (§4.5)
Tensor Program Workspace Lift (§4.3)
Dynamic Shape–Aware Memory Planning (§4.2)
CUDA Graph Oﬄoading (§4.4)
Build to Runnable Module (§4.6)

Graph-level optims
Tensor program optims
Lowering passes

Figure 13. Cross-level optimization and lowering pipeline.
library function)” pairs in Relax, and build pattern-matchand-rewrite passes that detect specific patterns (e.g., matmul
with epilogue) in the graph level, and partially lower detected
regions to foreign library calls. Relax also allows users to
register patterns for customizability. Additionally, based on
TensorIR [16] scheduling transformations, we build a set of
analysis-based dynamic shape–aware schedule rules to optimize tensor programs by minimizing memory loading. We
can also include passes to apply Ansor-style [8, 39, 49] autotuning for rare tensor programs (e.g., complicated convolutions) that our analysis-based schedule rules fail to handle.
Importantly, all these transformations can be composed together and work collectively. Relax enables fast development
and only requires a single relatively simple partial lowering
pass to customize the optimizations of operators.

4.6

Tensor Operator Optimizations via Partial
Lowering
Modern ML frameworks optimize tensor operators in two
approaches. We can offload computation to platform-specific
operator libraries, or leverage compiler tensor program optimizations and code generation. Most existing ML compilers
make these decisions at the boundary between the graph
level and lower levels, making it hard to compose different
lowering approaches. For instance, if we want to introduce
a new operator library, we need to carefully examine the
existing lowering strategies and update accordingly. The
complexity of the lowering layer grows as we incorporate
more approaches, such as different ways of auto-scheduling.
Relax applies tensor operator optimizations via partial
lowering (Figure 12). We register a set of “(subgraph pattern,

4.7 Optimization and Lowering Pipeline
Relax uses a fixed-order pipeline (without fixed point) on the
cross-level abstraction to optimize, lower and finally build
an end-to-end model into a runnable module. An example
pipeline is shown in Figure 13. We prioritize the partial library lowering (§4.6) to leverage external library functions
on the target platform. Next, we go through the whole program, generate tensor programs for all high-level operator

1007

