Relax: Composable Abstractions for End-to-End Dynamic Machine Learning

Decode Token Latency (ms/tok)

HF Transformers

Llama3-8B
20
15
1

16
32
Batch Size

64

vLLM

llama.cpp

Relax (Ours)

Gemma1.1-7B

35
30
25
20
15

25

10

HF w/ torch.compile

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Qwen2-7B
25
20
15

1

16
32
Batch Size

64

10

1

16
32
Batch Size

64

Figure 14. Inference performance of various models on NVIDIA RTX 4090 under different batch sizes. We omitted the results
of HF with torch.compile for Qwen2-7B due to the lack of support. Relax brings competitive performance across different
models and batch sizes, and reduces the decode token latency by up to 27%.
5.1 Large Language Model Inference Evaluation
This section evaluates the performance of Relax with end-toend LLMs, a typical class of emerging ML models, on NVIDIA
GPUs and emerging AMD and Apple GPUs. We assess the
per-token latency of the LLM generation decode phase across
different batch sizes, so that dynamism of both sequence
length and batch size is included. Our evaluation is conducted
on Llama3-8B, Gemma1.1-7B and Qwen2-7B with float16
weight and activations with NVIDIA RTX 4090, AMD Radeon
7900 XTX and Apple M2 Ultra. We compare with baseline
frameworks HuggingFace Transformers (v4.41.2) [45] with
PyTorch (v2.3.1) eager [30] and compile mode [2], vLLM [26]
(v0.5.0.post1), and hand-optimized LLM inference system
llama.cpp (172c825) [20]. FlashAttention [13] is enabled
for baselines when available. We construct Relax IR with a
PyTorch-like nn.Module interface. We measure the decode
time of generating 32 tokens and compute the per-token
latency per sequence. Importantly, Relax compiles models
only once for arbitrary batch sizes and sequence lengths.
Figure 14 to 16 show that Relax brings consistently competitive performance across platforms. In these cases, symbolic
shape analyses enable Relax to generate tensor programs
that are only dynamic for the batch size and sequence length
dimensions. Cross-level abstractions allow seamless composition of graph and tensor program optimizations for any GPU
backend, eliminating the needs to manually write kernels for
each individual backend. More importantly, cross-level abstractions enable us to use compiler-optimized matrix-vector
multiplication tensor programs at batch size 1, while being
able to apply partial library lowering to leverage operator
libraries for other batch sizes. This flexibility greatly helps
improve the performance of special cases.
Notably, while the HuggingFace Transformers with PyTorch compile mode supports dynamic sequence lengths, it
still requires static KV cache, which depends on significant
model definition changes and is therefore available only for
a few models.3 Additionally, not every baseline well supports
all the platforms. The hand-optimized llama.cpp has strong
performance on Apple GPUs but performs less effectively on

calls, and lower the operator calls to call_tir of corresponding tensor programs. We can then apply operator fusion,
tensor program workspace lifting, memory planning, and
CUDA Graph offloading. Notably, some tensor program optimizations (e.g., workspace lifting) are applied before graph
optimizations, which necessitates Relax’s cross-level abstraction design.
At the end of the pipeline is building the model into a
runnable module. At the graph level, a fundamental task is
to associate symbolic variables with concrete shape values
and compute symbolic expressions at runtime. We create an
integer host tensor to store runtime values of all symbolic expressions in the program. At the start of transformation, we
populate the values of symbolic variables in program input
tensors. We then generate tensor programs that load from
the tensor, evaluate symbolic expressions, and store results
to corresponding locations. Finally, we insert function calls
to construct shape tuples when tensor shapes are needed as
first-class values. After this transformation, we erase all annotations, leaving a program comprised mainly of low-level
function calls. The calls will then be translated to a sequence
of virtual machine instructions, each of which is a call into a
generated or builtin function. For optimized low-level tensor
programs, we directly generate corresponding GPU code. We
package the graph-level virtual machine instructions and the
GPU code together into a single holistic end-to-end module,
which can then run on the target platform of compilation.

5

Evaluation

We implement Relax on top of Apache TVM [7]. Notably,
the insights presented in this paper can also benefit other
ML compilation frameworks as well. This section provides
evaluation to answer the following questions:
• Does Relax provide competitive LLM inference performance compared with existing frameworks? (§5.1)?
• What are the effects of proposed abstractions and optimizations on performance and memory usage (§5.2)?
• Can Relax support these emerging LLMs on a broad set of
emerging platforms (§5.3)?
• How does Relax perform on a broader model set? (§5.4)?

3 https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/llm_optims

1008

