ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Ramya Prabhu, Ajay Nayak, Jayashree Mohan, Ramchandran Ramjee, & Ashish Panwar

(this is similar to vLLM’s default behavior). We leave more
sophisticated policies such as swapping out KV cache to CPU
memory as future work.
Depending on whether a request is in the prefill phase
or decode phase, different amount of physical memory may
need to be mapped for a given iteration. The prefill phase
processes the input tokens of a given prompt in parallel.
Therefore, the amount of physical memory needed to be
mapped depends on the number of prompt tokens being
scheduled. If the total K cache size of all prompt tokens at
one layer of the model is 𝑠 and page-group size is 𝑡, then each
worker needs to ensure that at least (𝑠 + 𝑡 − 1)/𝑡 page-groups
are mapped in each of the 2 × 𝑁 KV cache sub-tensors of the
given reqId.
For a request in the decode phase, the number of new
page-groups required is at most one per virtual tensor. This
is because each iteration produces only one output token for
a request. vAttention internally tracks the number of pagegroups mapped for each request and maps new page-groups
only when prior page-groups are about to be exhausted.
5.3.4 Request completion. A request terminates when
it reaches user specified or the maximum context length
supported by the model, or when the model produces a special end-of-sequence token. The framework notifies vAttention of a request’s completion with free_reqid (line 19).
Internally, vAttention may unmap the physical pages of a
completed request or defer them to be freed later (§6.1.2).
Supporting continuous batching: Continuous batching
poses one challenge in computing attention in our design.
When a request from somewhere in the middle of a batch
exits, it creates an unused hole in the virtual tensors of
KV cache. This layout is not supported by implementations
that expect the query (Q) and KV cache to be of the same
size in batch (𝐵) dimension. However, FlashAttention provides rich API support to address this issue; its argument
cache_batch_idx allows Q and KV cache to have different
batch sizes and also be arranged in arbitrary order (i.e., batch
index 0 in Q can be mapped to batch index 1 in KV cache). vAttention benefits from this API support in terms of both performance and ease of programming; when the request composition of a batch changes, we update cache_batch_idx
of running requests such that their Q tensors map to their
respective KV cache based on their reqId.

6

Optimizations

There are two challenges in using CUDA virtual memory
support for serving LLMs. First, invoking CUDA VMM APIs
at runtime incurs high latency. Second, cuMemCreate currently allocates memory only at the granularity of large
pages, i.e., multiples of 2MB. Use of large pages can waste
physical memory due to internal fragmentation. This section
details a set of simple-yet-effective optimizations that we
introduce to overcome these challenges.

6.1

Hiding Latency of Memory Allocation

The serving framework invokes the step API in every iteration. The latency of step depends on the number of pagegroups that need to be mapped into KV cache. Consider,
for example, that the KV cache of one request needs to be
extended for Yi-34B which has 60 layers. This requires 120
calls to cuMemMap + cuMemSetAccess each of which takes
about 40 microseconds. Therefore, growing the KV cache of
one request by new page-groups (two per layer) adds about
5 millisecond latency to the corresponding iteration. The
latency overhead grows proportional to the number of requests that need new page-groups in a given iteration. We
propose the following optimizations to hide this latency:
6.1.1 Overlapping memory allocation with compute
(decode phase). We leverage the predictability of memory
demand to overlap memory allocation with computation. In
particular, note that each iteration produces a single output
token for every decode request. Therefore, memory demand
for a decode iteration is known ahead-of-time. Further, in the
decode phase, a request requires at most one new page-group
for each of its virtual tensors. vAttention keeps track of the
current context length and how much physical memory is
already mapped for each request. Using this information, it
determines when a request would need more memory and
uses a background thread to allocate new page-groups when
the preceding iteration is executing. For example, consider
that a request R1 would require more physical memory in
iteration i. When the serving framework invokes step API
in iteration i-1, vAttention launches a background thread
that maps page-groups for iteration i. Since per-iteration
latency is typically in the range of 10s-100s of milliseconds,
the background thread has enough time to prepare physical
memory mappings for an iteration before it starts executing.
This way, vAttention hides the latency of CUDA APIs by
performing memory allocations out of the critical path.
6.1.2 Deferred reclamation + eager allocation (prefill
phase). We observe that allocating physical memory for the
prefill phase can be avoided in many cases. Consider that
a request R1 completed in iteration i and a new request R2
joins the running batch in iteration i+1. To avoid allocating
page-groups to R2 from scratch, vAttention simply defers the
reclamation of R1’s page-groups (Figure 5(d)) and assigns
R1’s reqId to R2. This way, R2 uses the same tensors for its
KV cache that R1 was using – which are already backed by
physical pages (Figure 5(e)). Therefore, new allocations are
required only if R2’s context length is higher than R1.
We further optimize the prefill phase by proactively allocating a small number of page-groups ahead of time. For this
purpose, we try to keep a certain number of page-groups
mapped into the virtual tensors of one of the inactive reqId.
When a new request arrives, we allocate this reqId. At the
same time, we identify a new reqId to be allocated next and

