ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Model

Ramya Prabhu, Ajay Nayak, Jayashree Mohan, Ramchandran Ramjee, & Ashish Panwar

Block size (# Tokens in a 2MB page)
w/o Tensor Slicing w/ Tensor Slicing

Yi-6B (TP-1)
Yi-6B (TP-2)
Llama-3-8B (TP-1)
Llama-3-8B (TP-2)
Yi-34B (TP-1)
Yi-34B (TP-2)

2048
4096
1024
2048
1024
2048

64
128
32
64
18
36

Table 10. KV cache block size with and without tensor slicing with 2MB pages.

prior design as shown in Table 10. In this design, the K cache
(or V cache) of a particular layer 𝑛 is represented by slice
[𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑛 : 𝑛 + 1, 𝐻, 𝐷] of the original tensor, and can be passed
to attention kernels for computation. However, note that
with tensor slicing, the K cache (and V cache) of each layer is
no longer contiguous. Computing attention over such a tensor slice is possible only if the the attention kernel supports
memory addressing with strides. While many kernels (e.g.,
FlashAttention-2) support strides out-of-the-box, the earlier
versions of FlashInfer lacked such support [14]. Therefore,
relying on tensor slicing as the primary method of reducing fragmentation would have prevented vAttention from
supporting FlashInfer kernels. Hence, to support unmodified
FlashInfer kernels, we chose to add support for smaller pages
in NVIDIA drivers. Importantly, our two solutions are compatible with each other; one could deploy smaller pages with
tensor slicing to further reduce fragmentation, if required.
8.3

Programming Effort

PagedAttention requires significant programming effort. For
example, integrating FlashInfer decode kernels in vLLM
required more than 600 lines of code changes in over 15
files [24, 27, 30]. Implementing the initial paging support in
FlashAttention-2 kernel also required ≈ 280 lines of code
changes [20] and additional efforts to support small block
sizes [8]. In contrast, vAttention makes it feasible to replace
one attention kernel with another with only a few lines of
code changes in the serving framework (Figure 16). Note
that the example shown in Figure 16 has no interaction with
memory management; this is precisely the goal of vAttention,
i.e., when a slow kernel is replaced by a fast kernel, memory
management should continue to work transparently.

9

Related Work

Optimizing LLM inference is an active area of research [44,
50, 53–57, 71, 72, 81, 83]. Various techniques have been proposed to improve different aspects of LLM serving like batching [35, 51, 78], disaggregation [48, 63, 82], scheduling [69,
75]. However, central to all these techniques is the need
for efficient KV cache memory management. Since vLLM,

Figure 16. Illustration of code changes needed to replace
the prefill attention kernel of FlashAttention-2 by FlashInfer
when using vAttention for memory allocation.

PagedAttention has been adopted in various serving frameworks e.g., TensorRT-LLM [6], LightLLM [4], and libraries
e.g., FlashAttention-2 [1] and FlashInfer [3]. Some other concurrent works have also proposed optimizations for attention
kernels [29, 39, 47, 49, 66, 67, 76, 80]. Deploying new kernels
for inference is hard with PagedAttention. vAttention offers
an alternate – which we believe is also a more principled –
approach to dynamic KV cache memory management that
makes it easier to deploy new kernels.
In a recent work, GMLake [45] showed that using CUDA
virtual memory support can mitigate fragmentation in DNN
training jobs, increasing training batch size. In particular,
GMLake uses CUDA support to coalesce multiple smaller
physical memory pages into a single virtually contiguous
object that can prevent out-of-memory errors. In contrast,
vAttention targets optimizing inference workloads.

10

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose vAttention for dynamic KV cache
memory management in LLM serving systems. The key highlight of vAttention is that it mitigates fragmentation in physical memory while retaining the contiguity of KV cache in
virtual memory. We present various examples to highlight
that vAttention reduces programming burden while improving portability and performance compared to the popular
PagedAttention approach.

Acknowledgments
We thank our shepherd Sam Ainsworth, along with the
anonymous ASPLOS reviewers, for their valuable feedback.
We thank NVIDIA for useful discussions on CUDA VMM
APIs and for sharing their experiences with vAttention. We
also thank members of the open-source community (GitHub
user names izhuhaoran and tongping) for trying to upstream
the vAttention approach to vLLM [23, 31], and Zihao Ye for
clarifying the role of register spilling in the runtime overhead of PagedAttention. Ajay Nayak is supported by the
Prime Minister’s Fellowship Scheme for Doctoral Research,
co-sponsored by the Confederation of Indian Industry, the
Government of India, and Microsoft Research India.

