2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)

Flag-Proxy Networks: Overcoming the Architectural,
Scheduling and Decoding Obstacles of Quantum LDPC Codes
Suhas Vittal

Ali Javadi-Abhari

Andrew W. Cross

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, United States
suhaskvittal@gatech.edu

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, United States
ali.javadi@ibm.com

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, United States
awcross@us.ibm.com

Lev S. Bishop

Moinuddin Qureshi

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, United States
lsbishop@us.ibm.com

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, United States
moin@gatech.edu

Abstract—Quantum error correction is necessary for achieving
exponential speedups on important applications. The planar
surface code has remained the most studied error-correcting code
for the last two decades because of its relative simplicity. However,
encoding a singular logical qubit with the planar surface code
requires physical qubits quadratic in the code distance (d), making it space-inefficient for the large-distance codes necessary for
promising applications. Thus, Quantum Low-Density Parity-Check
(QLDPC) have emerged as an alternative to the planar surface
code but require a higher degree of connectivity. Furthermore,
the problems of fault-tolerant syndrome extraction and decoding
are understudied for these codes and also remain obstacles to
their usage.
In this paper, we consider two under-studied families of
QLDPC codes: hyperbolic surface codes and hyperbolic color
codes. We tackle the three challenges mentioned above as follows.
First, we propose Flag-Proxy Networks (FPNs), a generalizable
architecture for quantum codes that achieves low connectivity
through flag and proxy qubits. Second, we propose a greedy
syndrome extraction scheduling algorithm for general quantum
codes and further use this algorithm for fault-tolerant syndrome
extraction on FPNs. Third, we present two decoders that leverage
flag measurements to decode the hyperbolic codes accurately. Our
work finds that degree-4 FPNs of the hyperbolic surface and color
codes are respectively 2.9× and 5.5× more space-efficient than
the d = 5 planar surface code, and become even more spaceefficient when considering higher distances. The hyperbolic codes
also have error rates comparable to their planar counterparts.
Index Terms—Quantum Error Correction, Quantum Error
Decoding, Syndrome Extraction

I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum error correction is the most promising path towards realizing exponential speedups for applications in quantum chemistry and cryptanalysis [10, 14, 24, 29, 40, 42].
Error-corrected quantum computers leverage quantum error
correction by encoding multiple noisy physical qubits into a
logical block containing fewer error-resilient logical qubits.
The logical qubits encoded by quantum error correcting codes
have better fidelity than their constituent physical qubits,
provided the physical error rate is low enough (e.g., 0.1%).
In this paper, we focus on superconducting quantum computers. Quantum error-correcting codes implemented on su2379-315/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00059

perconducting quantum computers arrange physical qubits into
data qubits, which maintain the logical state, and parity qubits,
which detect X and Z errors. Leveraging these parity qubits
requires executing a quantum syndrome extraction circuit,
which entangles the parity qubits with neighboring data qubits.
Subsequently, these parity qubits are measured, yielding a
bitstring known as a syndrome. The syndrome is sent to a
decoder, which identifies errors on the data qubits. However,
since syndromes are unreliable as syndrome extraction itself is
erroneous, the decoder must analyze d consecutive rounds of
syndromes to identify errors accurately. Ideally, a distance d
quantum error-correcting code should correct up to (d − 1)/2
errors within d syndrome extraction rounds; increasing d
exponentially suppresses error. However, circuit errors can
harm the effective distance of the code, preventing (d − 1)/2
errors from being corrected. A syndrome extraction circuit is
fault-tolerant if the effective distance is sufficiently high such
that errors remain exponentially suppressed with increasing d.
The planar surface code has remained the focus of error
correction research for the last two decades. We attribute this
dominance to three reasons:
1) The planar surface code requires grid connectivity,
which is easy to fabricate using superconducting qubits.
For this reason, the planar surface code has been realized
on multiple quantum processors [1, 2, 30]. In contrast,
more densely connected processors are hard to fabricate
due to frequency crowding and crosstalk [35, 39].
2) Fault-tolerant syndrome extraction for the planar surface code is enabled by diligent CNOT scheduling [44].
In contrast, fault-tolerant syndrome extraction with other
quantum codes requires additional physical overheads beyond data and parity qubits [11]–[13].
3) The planar surface code can be decoded with the Minimum Weight Perfect Matching (MWPM) algorithm, whose
implementations are fast and readily available [25, 27].
However, the planar surface code is space-inefficient as any
amount of redundancy encodes a singular logical qubit. For

718

