corresponding subset of the Mess measurements for all Intel
platforms under study. The MLC and Mess results show the                                              Saturated bandwidth range

same trend, with slightly lower (<5%) latencies reported by           Maximum
                                                                      latency
the Mess benchmark. This is because the Mess is designed for          range
close-to-the-hardware memory characterization, and, unlike
the MLC, it excludes the latency penalties introduced by the
OS overheads, the TLB misses and the page walk.                                               STREAM
                                                                      Unloaded latency        bandwidth

C. Performance analysis
   Figure 2 illustrates the Mess benchmark performance Fig. 2: The Mess benchmark models the memory system
analysis with an example of the 24-core Intel Skylake server performance with a family of bandwidth–latency curves.
with six DDR4-2666 memory channels [54]. The figure
confirms a general trend of the memory access latency, which
is initially roughly constant and then increases with higher Mess benchmark provides the microarchitecture view and
memory pressure (i.e. bandwidth) due to resource contention considers all memory traffic visible by hardware counters.
among parallel accesses [37], [55], [56].                       Differences between these two approaches are analyzed in the
   Detailed and close-to-the-hardware Mess characterization next section.
reveals some memory system aspects not discussed by previous
studies. The most important one is the impact of the read and        III. P ERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION : ACTUAL
write memory traffic. The best performance, the lowest latency                             SYSTEMS
and the highest achieved bandwidth, are obtained for 100%-         We use the Mess measurements to compare the memory
read traffic. Memory writes reduce the memory performance system performance of Intel, AMD, IBM, Fujitsu and Amazon
and reach the saturation point sooner. This is due to the servers as well as NVIDIA GPUs with DDR4, DDR5, HBM2
extra timing constraints such as tW R and tW T R , which come and HBM2E. The platform and memory system characteristics
with memory write operations [57]. We detect this behavior are listed in Table I while Figure 3 shows their bandwidth–
for all the Intel, AMD, IBM, Fujitsu, and Amazon servers latency curves. The unloaded memory latency varies signif-
as well as NVIDIA GPUs used in the study with DDR4, icantly between different platforms. It ranges from 85 ns in
DDR5, HBM2 and HBM2E memory (Section III). However, the Cascade Lake server with DDR4, to 122 ns in the A64FX
we see a very different write traffic impact on CXL memory servers with HBM2 and 129 ns in the Graviton 3 with DDR5
expanders [34]. This behavior of CXL memory expanders is main memory. This difference should not be directly associated
analyzed in Section V-C.                                        to the main memory. For example, the AMD Zen2 comprises
   Apart from the memory bandwidth–latency curves, we use DDR4 technology with practically the same command latencies
the Mess benchmark to derive memory system performance (in nanoseconds) as the Intel Cascade Lake server, and still
metrics, also depicted in Figure 2, for quantitative comparison it shows almost 30 ns higher unloaded memory latency. This
of different memory systems. In addition to the commonly-used is because the load-to-use latency considers the time memory
unloaded memory latency, the detailed Mess characterization requests spend within the CPU chip, including the cache
quantifies the maximum latency range of memory access hierarchy and network on chip. These timings can differ
latencies for all read/write ratios and the saturated bandwidth significantly between different CPU architectures. We detect
range. The memory system is saturated when any further the highest unloaded memory latencies in the chips with the
increase in the memory system pressure, i.e. bandwidth, leads largest number of cores (Zen2, A64FX, Graviton 3) indicating
to a high increase in the memory access latency. We consider that at least a portion of this latency is likely to be attributed
that the saturated bandwidth area starts at the point in which to the network on chip which is larger and more complex in
the memory access latency doubles the unloaded latency. In these architectures. NVIDIA H100 GPU shows higher unloaded
some of the platforms under study, we also detect that the latency due to its massive number of arithmetic processing units,
increase in the Mess memory access rate causes a memory lower on-chip frequency, and complex memory hierarchy [53],
bandwidth decline, while the access latency continues to [65].
increase. This behavior is observed in the bandwidth–latency       We also detect a wide maximum latency range between
curves as a “wave form” seen in Figure 2. The causes for this different platforms, and even within a single platform for
memory behavior are analyzed in Section III. To the best of different read and write memory traffic. Maximum memory
our knowledge, our study is the first one to detect and analyze latency is a primary concern in real-time systems, and it is
this suboptimal memory system behavior.                         less critical in high-performance computing (HPC). Still it
   Figure 2 also depicts the bandwidth reported by the has to be bound to guarantee quality of service of some HPC
STREAM benchmark (vertical dashed lines). STREAM and applications. We believe that our study may open a discussion
Mess provide complementary memory bandwidth analysis. about the sources of different maximum latencies in different
While STREAM is the de facto standard for measuring systems, e.g. due to the different lengths of the memory queues,
application-level sustained memory bandwidth [5], [58], the and about its desirable limits.



                                                               4
