Trinity: A General Purpose FHE Accelerator
Xianglong Deng1, 2 , Shengyu Fan1, 2 , Zhicheng Hu3 , Zhuoyu Tian1, 2 , Zihao Yang1, 2 , Jiangrui Yu4, 5 ,
Dingyuan Cao6 , Dan Meng1 , Rui Hou1 , Meng Li4, 5 , Qian Lou7 and Mingzhe Zhang1
1 Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
4 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
5 School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing, China
6 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA

arXiv:2410.13405v1 [cs.AR] 17 Oct 2024

7 University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA

{dengxianglong, fanshengyu, tianzhuoyu, yangzihao, mengdan, hourui}@iie.ac.cn
zhichenghu@std.uestc.edu.cn, meng.li@pku.edu.cn, jiangrui.yu@stu.pku.edu.cn
dc29@illinois.edu, qian.lou@ucf.edu, mingzhe-zhang@outlook.com

Abstract—Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) is crucial for
privacy-preserving computing, which allows direct computation
on encrypted data. While various FHE schemes have been
proposed, none of them efficiently support both arithmetic FHE
and logic FHE simultaneously. To address this issue, researchers
explore the combination of different FHE schemes within a single
application and propose algorithms for the conversion between
them. Unfortunately, all prior ASIC-based FHE accelerators
are designed to support a single FHE scheme, and none of
them supports the acceleration for FHE scheme conversion.
This necessitates FHE acceleration systems to integrate multiple
accelerators for different schemes, leading to increased system
complexity and hindering performance enhancement.
In this paper, we present the first multi-modal FHE accelerator
based on a unified architecture, which efficiently supports CKKS,
TFHE, and their conversion scheme within a single accelerator.
To achieve this goal, we first analyze the theoretical foundations of
the aforementioned schemes and highlight their composition from
a finite number of arithmetic kernels. Then, we investigate the
challenges for efficiently supporting these kernels within a unified
architecture, which include 1) concurrent support for NTT and
FFT, 2) maintaining high hardware utilization across various
polynomial lengths, and 3) ensuring consistent performance
across diverse arithmetic kernels. To tackle these challenges,
we propose a novel FHE accelerator named Trinity, which incorporates algorithm optimizations, hardware component reuse,
and dynamic workload scheduling to enhance the acceleration of
CKKS, TFHE, and their conversion scheme. By adaptive select
the proper allocation of components for NTT and MAC, Trinity
maintains high utilization across NTTs with various polynomial
lengths and imbalanced arithmetic workloads. The experiment
results show that, for the pure CKKS and TFHE workloads,
the performance of our Trinity outperforms the state-of-theart accelerator for CKKS (SHARP) and TFHE (Morphling) by
1.49× and 4.23×, respectively. Moreover, Trinity achieves 919.3×
performance improvement for the FHE-conversion scheme over
the CPU-based implementation. Notably, despite the performance
improvement, the hardware overhead of Trinity is only 85% of
the summed circuit areas of SHARP and Morphling.
Index Terms—CKKS, TFHE, Scheme Conversion, ASIC, FHE.

Xianglong Deng and Shengyu Fan contributed equally to this work. The
corresponding author is Mingzhe Zhang (mingzhe-zhang@outlook.com).

I. I NTRODUCTION
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) is a novel encryption
method that enables direct computations on encrypted data.
This capability allows users to perform secure computation on
private data in untrusted environments, making FHE a valuable
technique for privacy-preserving computing.
Several FHE schemes have been proposed, which can be
categorized into two types: the arithmetic FHE (i.e. BGV
[8], BFV [7], and CKKS [12]) and logic FHE (i.e. FHEW
[15] and TFHE [13]). Arithmetic FHE allows SIMD-style
arithmetic operations by packing multiple plaintexts into a
ciphertext. In contrast, logic FHE encrypts a single bit into
a ciphertext and allows logic operations such as comparison.
The real-world applications contain both arithmetic and logic
operations, however, none of the FHE schemes can support
both of them. Therefore, researchers have started to study the
construction of hybrid-scheme applications based on different
types of FHE schemes and have proposed several Scheme
Conversion algorithms [4], [10], [26] between different types
of FHE schemes.
Hybrid-scheme applications pose challenges to the FHE
accelerator. Several FHE accelerators [3], [22], [23], [33], [34]
have been proposed, but they only provide efficient support
for one type of FHE scheme. For example, SHARP [22] can
efficiently support the 36-bit version of the CKKS scheme,
which outperforms CPU by 22939× with reasonable hardware
overheads. Morphling improves the TFHE workloads over
CPU by 2343×. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no FHE accelerators that can support the Scheme Conversion algorithm. Therefore, a general FHE system should be
implemented with heterogeneous accelerators, which increases
the system complexity and probably decrease the overall
performance.
In this paper, we make a comprehensive investigation for the
CKKS, TFHE, and the conversion schemes, and then present
several key observations: 1) both schemes and the conversion
algorithm consist of a finite set of kernels; 2) the Fast Fourier

Transform (FFT) used in TFHE can be approximately replaced
by the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT); 3) the key to
uniform hardware design is maintaining high utilization across
various workloads. Based on the above observations, we propose an accelerator named Trinity, which efficiently supports
the above schemes within the unified architecture as follows:
1) We substitute FFT with NTT in TFHE by selecting an appropriate modulus q; 2) We design a configurable component
that dynamically supports NTT across different polynomial
lengths; 3) We implement a component reuse strategy that
employs some MAC units for NTT computations, ensuring
workload balance across various workloads.
We evaluate our proposed Trinity within both CKKS and
TFHE applications. The experimental results show that, within
CKKS applications, Trinity achieves an average speedup over
SHARP [22] by 1.49×. For TFHE applications, Trinity outperforms Morphling [31] by 4.23×. When considering the
conversion between CKKS and TFHE, Trinity outperforms
CPU-based implementation by 919.3×. When considering the
hardware overhead, the area of Trinity is smaller than the total
area of SHARP and Morphling by 15%.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
• For the first time, we make detailed investigation for
the opportunities and challenges of efficiently support
various FHE schemes and their conversion algorithms
within the unified architecture. These experiences bridge
the cryptography and computer architecture, which will
probably inspire the future works.
• We explore to provide high-performance support for
various FHE kernels (i.e., NTT with different polynomial
lengths, and NTT and MAC workload with changing
proportion) within the heterogeneous architecture and
dynamic schedule.
• We experimentally prove that, it is possible to architect
high-performance multi-modal accelerator based on reasonable hardware overhead.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we first describe the data types, kernels, and
operations utilized in both the CKKS and TFHE cryptographic
schemes. Furthermore, we introduce the algorithm for the
Scheme Conversion between CKKS and TFHE. To facilitate
comprehension, we summarize all notations, parameters, and
operations discussed in this paper in Table I. Additionally, we
summarize the hierarchical operation reconstruction model of
CKKS in Table II.
A. CKKS scheme
CKKS is an arithmetic FHE, which enables SIMD-style
arithmetic operations by packing multiple plaintexts into a
ciphertext. The homomorphic operation of CKKS can be
decomposed into the following kernels:
• NTT. NTT accelerates polynomial multiplication, by
transforming a polynomial from the coefficient representation to the evaluation representation.

TABLE I: Notations, parameters and operations.
Notation

Description

m
[[m]]
m
[[m]]
P (X)
Pm
n
N
∆
RQ
Q
P
qi
pi
L
l
Rql
dnum
α
β
evk
nlwe
k
q
lb
lk
ACCi
ksk
bsk
nslot
Rotate
SampleExtract
Decompose

Plaintext vector.
RLWE ciphertext of m. [[m]]= (a(X), b(X)).
Scalar plaintext.
LWE ciphertext of scalar message m. [[m]]= (a, b).
Polynomial.
Plaintext polynomial corresponding to message m.
The number of slots in a ciphertext.
The polynomial size.
The scale factor.
The polynomial ring, RQ = ZQ /(X N + 1).
Q
The polynomial modulusQQ = L
i=0 qi .
α
The special prime P = i=0 pi .
The small RNS moduli composing Q.
The small RNS moduli composing P .
The maximum level of polynomial.
The current level of polynomial.
Polynomial at level l.
The decomposition number.
L+1
The number of RNS moduli in a digit. α = ⌈ dnum
⌉.
l+1
β = ⌈ dnum ⌉.
The evaluation key.
The dimension of LWE ciphertext.
The dimension of GLWE ciphertext.
The modulus of coefficients.
The decomposition level of bootstrapping key.
The decomposition level of TFHE keyswitching key.
The accumulation ciphertext in i-th iteration.
The keyswitch key in TFHE.
The bootstrapping key in TFHE.
The number of valid slots in the RLWE ciphertext.
Rotate([[m]]) → (a(X) · X r , b(X) · X r ).
SampleExtract([[m]], i) → [[m[i]]]
Decompose(P (X), l) → (P̃ (X)0 ,...,P̃ (X)l−1 ).

TABLE II: Hierarchical reconstruction model of CKKS.
Operation

Description

HMult

Multiply two ciphertexts

PMult
HRotate

Multiply a ciphertext by a plaintext
Homomorphic rotation of ciphertext

HAdd
PAdd
Rescale

Add two ciphertexts
Add a ciphertext and a plaintext
Reduce the level of a ciphertext

Composing
Kernels
NTT, BConv, IP,
ModMul, ModAdd
ModMul, ModAdd
NTT, BConv, IP,
ModMul, ModAdd,
Auto
ModAdd
ModAdd
NTT, ModAdd

BConv. BConv adjusts the coefficient modulus of a polynomial. The process involves multiplying a polynomial
matrix of size α × N by a base matrix of size l × α,
effectively changing the modulus from qα to ql [23].
• IP. IP multiplies a polynomial with the evaluation
key (evk) during KeySwitch. IP operations can also
be structured as a multiplication between a vector
[d˜0 , . . . , d˜dnum−1 ] and an evk matrix of size dnum × 2
• ModMul. ModMul performs the element-wise modular
multiplication of two polynomials that are in evaluation
representation.
• ModAdd. ModAdd performs the element-wise modular
addition of two polynomials.
• Auto.
Auto performs automorphism transform on a
polynomial, which maps the indices of each coefficient
•

