arXiv:2409.05227v1 [cs.LG] 8 Sep 2024

BBS: Bi-directional Bit-level Sparsity for
Deep Learning Acceleration
Yuzong Chen

Jian Meng

Jae-sun Seo

Mohamed S. Abdelfattah

Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
yc2367@cornell.edu

Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
jm2787@cornell.edu

Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
js3528@cornell.edu

Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
mohamed@cornell.edu

Numerous efficiency algorithms [21], [30], [31] and hardware prototypes [6], [13], [14], [42], [43] have been proposed
to leverage value-based sparsity in DNNs to reduce the cost
of storing and deploying DNNs. Yet the degree of such value
sparsity, which depends on the underlying model architecture,
can strongly limit the resulting hardware performance. For
instance, recent transformer-based DNNs show limited or no
activation sparsity with GeLU and sigmoid activation functions [7], [9]. Even for single-sided sparse accelerators that
target weight sparsity, plenty of time and cost are spent on
retraining the model to balance the degree of sparsity and accuracy loss. Unfortunately, in many real-world cases, retraining
may become impractical for end users due to cost constraints
and lack of access to the original training dataset [3], [39]. This
challenge is particularly pronounced in recent large language
models [40], [47] that contain billions of parameters, making
retraining even more resource and data intensive. Hence, there
is a strong need to further enhance the efficiency of DNN
accelerators without imposing retraining.
Another line of DNN compression research focuses on posttraining quantization (PTQ), which represents DNN operands
in lower precision without retraining the model [15], [24],
[25], [32], [36], [44], [45]. For example, researchers have
designed new quantization data types such as the Microscaling
format [36], where a group of low-precision operands can
share an 8-bit exponent to balance the accuracy and memory
footprint. However, Microscaling still requires a floating-point
pipeline to handle the shared 8-bit exponent, resulting in
higher hardware cost than integer quantization. On the other
hand, state-of-the-art PTQ algorithms can already reduce the
operand precision to 8-bit integer with negligible accuracy
loss [24], [32], [44]. Unfortunately, a quantized 8-bit DNN
shows extremely low value sparsity (less than 5% as will
be shown in the next section), since it tries to utilize all
quantization levels as much as possible to reduce the quantization error. This fundamental quantization-sparsity tension
poses a big performance bottleneck in existing value-based
DNN accelerators [16], [38].
In order to jointly exploit the efficiency of quantization and
sparsity, a series of bit-serial DNN accelerators exploit bitlevel sparsity [1], [19], [20], [26], [37], [39]. Unlike coarsegrained value sparsity that is incompatible with quantization,
the bit-level sparsity targets the abundant zero bits in the

Abstract—Bit-level sparsity methods skip ineffectual zero-bit
operations and are typically applicable within bit-serial deep
learning accelerators. This type of sparsity at the bit-level is
especially interesting because it is both orthogonal and compatible with other deep neural network (DNN) efficiency methods
such as quantization and pruning. Furthermore, it comes at little
or no accuracy degradation and can be performed completely
post-training. However, current bit-sparsity approaches lack
practicality because of (1) load imbalance from the random
distribution of zero bits, (2) unoptimized external memory access
because all bits are fetched from off-chip memory, and (3) high
hardware implementation overhead, including large multiplexers
and shifters to support sparsity at the bit level.
In this work, we improve the practicality and efficiency of bitlevel sparsity through a novel algorithmic bit-pruning, averaging,
and compression method, and a co-designed efficient bit-serial
hardware accelerator. On the algorithmic side, we introduce bidirectional bit sparsity (BBS). The key insight of BBS is that we
can leverage bit sparsity in a symmetrical way to prune either
zero-bits or one-bits. This significantly improves the load balance
of bit-serial computing and guarantees the level of sparsity to
be more than 50%. On top of BBS, we further propose two
bit-level binary pruning methods that require no retraining, and
can be seamlessly applied to quantized DNNs. Combining binary
pruning with a new tensor encoding scheme, BBS can both
skip computation and reduce the memory footprint associated
with bi-directional sparse bit columns. On the hardware side,
we demonstrate the potential of BBS through BitVert, a bitserial architecture with an efficient PE design to accelerate DNNs
with low overhead, exploiting our proposed binary pruning.
Evaluation on seven representative DNN models shows that our
approach achieves: (1) on average 1.66× reduction in model size
with negligible accuracy loss of < 0.5%; (2) up to 3.03× speedup
and 2.44× energy saving compared to prior DNN accelerators.
Index Terms—Deep learning accelerator, bit-serial computing,
hardware-software co-design, sparsity, model compression

I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable accomplishments in many important fields such as computer vision and natural language processing. However, the
growth of DNN model size and complexity continues to
outpace the scaling of compute performance in existing hardware platforms [12]. Bridging this performance gap is very
desirable for wider adoption of DNNs, particularly in edge
scenarios that demand both high performance and energy
efficiency. Codesigning novel DNN compression algorithms,
together with accelerators for the efficient deployment of the
compressed models, is a promising way to achieve this goal.

1

Pruned Bit Columns

Original 2's Complement

Sign Magnitude w. Zero

2's Complement w.

❶ Bit Columns (Previous)

❶ Bi-directional Sparse

MSE = 1.75

Columns (Ours), MSE = 0.75

77 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1

76 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0

78 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0

-25 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1

-24 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0

-26 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0

6 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0

4 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0

6 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0

-11 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 1

-12 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0

-10 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0

PTQ INT5 Weight
KL Div = 5.1 E-6

❷ KL Div = 1.8 E-6

is used, the resulting distribution can only have 25 = 32
discrete quantization levels, resulting in large KL divergence,
a common metric to quantify the difference between two
distributions [17]. On the other hand, previous bit-sparsityaware works [23], [35], [39] leverage sign-magnitude format
to prune bit columns at the group level as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Given that DNN weights are typically small, many inherent
zero bit columns exist (e.g., the third bit columns in Fig. 1(b)),
leading to less sparse columns enforced (e.g., the seventh and
eighth bit columns in Fig. 1(b)) to achieve the effective 5-bit
data width. As a result, they can preserve more quantization
levels and achieve lower KL divergence and better accuracy
than PTQ. However, if there is no inherent sparse bit column
in a group, all lower significant bit columns must be flipped
to zero, leading to reduced quantization levels especially in
intervals with large absolute values (e.g., > |50| in Fig. 1(b)).

❷ KL Div = 8 E-7

ResNet-50
Conv4.1.3
INT8 Weight

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1: Comparison of different model compression approaches. (a) Example
of a 4-value group and the weight distribution of a ResNet-50 layer before
and after PTQ. (b) 1 Bit-sparsity enhancement by generating three zero bit
columns using sign-magnitude format, 2 achieving lower KL divergence than
PTQ but still losing many quantization levels. (c) 1 BBS generates three bidirectional sparse bit columns and is able to preserve all quantization levels
of 8-bit precision, 2 leading to much lower KL divergence.

Our focus: this work proposes a novel sparsity concept
called bi-directional bit-level sparsity (BBS) and the associate
bit-serial accelerator design named BitVert. The key insight
of BBS is that the bit-level sparsity can be explored in a
symmetrical way, where less zero-bits implies more one-bits,
and vice versa. This ensures that any bit vector can exhibit
at least 50% BBS, which significantly improves the load
balance of bit-serial computing while minimizing the number
of ineffectual bit operations. Due to the balanced workload,
BBS eliminates the expensive bit synchronization mechanism
that is typically associated with prior bit-serial accelerators [1],
[20], [26]. Furthermore, unlike previous bit-sparsity-aware
works that only prune zero bit columns, BBS offers a new
opportunity for model compression—it permits pruning a bit
column with entirely zero-bits or entirely one-bits, which we
call bi-directional sparse bit columns. As shown in Fig. 1(c),
by looking for an optimal way to generate 3 bi-directional
sparse columns, we can achieve much lower MSE compared
to merely pruning zero bit columns with the same compression
ratio. Additionally, since BBS allows any bit significance to
be one, it preserves all quantization levels of the original INT8
weight and yields much lower KL divergence w.r.t. the original
numerical distribution pre-compression. Finally, the balanced
nature of BBS can be exploited in a hardware-friendly manner
to improve the performance and energy efficiency of bitserial accelerators. The main contributions of this work are
summarized as follows:

binary representation of operands, thus is both compatible and
orthogonal to other forms of DNN redundancy. Stripes [19] is
an early bit-serial prototype that uses reduced precision for
DNNs to scale the performance. Pragmatic [1], Laconic [37]
and Bitlet [26] propose to skip zero-bit operations from
different perspectives. However, the distribution of zero bits
is generally random, whether in an individual operand or a
group of operands, leading to significant workload imbalance.
A direct consequence is that these accelerators must still fetch
all data bits from off-chip memory, and use sophisticated
hardware schedulers to skip zero-bit operations as much as
possible during on-chip computation. The latter usually incurs
non-trivial hardware overhead.
To reduce both memory access and scheduling overhead
of bit-serial computing, BitWave [39] employs a bit-columnserial approach, which examines the sparsity of the same
bit significance across a group of operands. If a bit column
contains all zero-bits, then it does not need to be stored in
memory. Moreover, BitWave proposes a bit-sparsity-enhancing
technique based on sign-magnitude formatted weights to selectively flip bits to zero. With this bit-flip technique, BitWave is
able to further compress a quantized 8-bit DNN by generating
more zero bit columns. As a result, it has demonstrated the
potential to achieve higher performance than other bit-serial
accelerators [1], [19], [26].
Despite these approaches exploring bit sparsity at varying
degrees, they still suffer from one significant drawback: bit
sparsity is only limited to zero bits. To demonstrate this
problem, consider Figure 1(a) that shows a group of four INT8
values, as well as the INT8 weight distribution of a layer in
ResNet-50. If we want to further reduce the bit-width to, e.g.,
5-bit, conventional PTQ needs coarse-grained clipping and
re-scaling so that the quantization mean square error (MSE)
is minimized. Nevertheless, no matter what PTQ algorithm

1) We introduce the new BBS concept, and demonstrate
that BBS significantly improves the load balance of bitserial accelerators.
2) We propose two bit-level binary pruning strategies to
enhance structured BBS. The binary pruning employs a
new encoding scheme to reduce the memory footprint
of a quantized DNN without the need of retraining.
3) We design BitVert, a bit-serial accelerator to exploit
BBS for DNN acceleration. BitVert adopts an efficient
processing element (PE) with low hardware overhead for
bit skipping, along with a channel-reordering mechanism
to support binary pruning.

2

