BABOL: A Software-Defined
NAND Flash Controller
Kibin Park*
Alberto Lerner†
Sangjin Lee†
§
Yong Ho Song
Philippe Cudré-Mauroux†
†

Philippe Bonnet‡
Jungwook Choi*

*
University of Fribourg, Switzerland
Hanyang University, South Korea
‡
§
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Samsung Electronics

Abstract—NAND Flash Storage Controllers are a crucial component of Solid State Drives (SSDs). They provide an abstraction
of Flash packages to the SSD firmware by translating high-level
operations, such as a Page Program or a Block Erase, into lowlevel signals. In theory, the Open NAND Flash Interface (ONFI)
specification standardizes this interface. In practice, however,
every package supports optimized versions of the standard operations as well as non-standard operations. Writing a controller
that exploits these optimizations is the only way to obtain
competitive performance, but it makes for a highly intricate,
error-prone, and non-portable controller development process.
Compounding the issue is the fact that new generations of Flash
packages are produced yearly, and non-standard optimization
techniques are often presented in the literature. Modifying rigid
hardware controllers to support these advancements is extremely
challenging, making it difficult to rapidly prototype new SSDs
and exploit the full potential of Flash memory.
To address this, we propose BABOL, a software-defined Flash
controller architecture that provides generic hardware building
blocks that can be flexibly combined via software to express
complex, package-optimized Flash operations. We implemented
two flavors of BABOL in an FPGA setting and experimented
with several commercial off-the-shelf Flash packages. Our results
show that the flexibility that BABOL brings far outweighs the
marginal amounts of performance and area it requires. We open
source our controller, including its unique software programming
environment, which we believe can make SSD controller development more productive for seasoned SSD Architects and make
prototyping accessible for newcomers who want to join the field.
Index Terms—Storage, SSD, Flash Controller.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NAND Flash is the de facto storage medium for dataintensive applications [3], [6], [19], [28], [53], [58] and fast
storage [16], [26], [30], [36]. This is due in no small part to
the high number of variations into which Flash memory can
be packaged. For instance, the Flash Arrays, which are the
fundamental building blocks of Flash storage, can be made of
cells that hold one, two, three, or even four bits of information.
These arrays can be built into planar or 3D structures providing
a variety of address space sizes, and several of those arrays
can be present in what is called a multi-plane package. These
geometry details, which are nicely explained elsewhere [2],
[40], [41], unlock many possibilities on how an SSD can
optimize the performance, longevity, and energy consumption
of its underlying Flash storage [13], [15], [38], [49].

Ideally, the norms laid out by the ONFI standard [45] make
Flash packages interchangeable regardless of their implementation details. The standard specifies the number and voltage
of pins a compliant Flash package must have and outlines
how different data transfer speeds and modes (synchronous
and asynchronous) can be achieved via these pins. From
an electrical interoperability perspective, the standard can be
considered successful.
Unfortunately, ONFI is less effective when it comes to
operations. The issue is not a lack of standard operations;
there exists a standard READ, PROGRAM, and ERASE. They
each entail using the standard pins to produce a unique
waveform, and an SSD architect could develop a controller that
issues these waveforms against various packages. However, the
standard waveforms lack important optimizations since they
abstract away relevant internal Flash Array details.
Take a READ operation for instance. The standard indeed
supports some variations of this operation, such as a PAGE
READ, a READ CACHE (to interleave reads), and a CHANGE
READ COLUMN (for partial reads). However, there exist many
variations offered by manufacturers on a per-package basis
such as PSEUDO SLC READs (to increase the longevity of
the device) [14]. Other variations are offered by the academic
literature, such as PARTIAL READ [20], [33], READs with
bounded latency [32], and READ RETRY [34], [48]. Similarly,
optimizations also exist for a PROGRAM [10], [52] as well as
an ERASE operation [23], [54], to cite a few. The variations
are often faster or provide additional interesting functionality
(e.g., possibility to suspend long operations).
With such a wide range of alternative optimizations, an SSD
Architect often foregoes portability in the name of performance. They develop specialized hardware controllers in what
is an extraordinarily laborious and error-prone process, and all
the work goes into what is essentially a one-off controller. The
controller logic may need to be revisited if any changes occur,
such as those a new package may bring.
Interestingly, other SSD components, such as the HostInterface Controller (HIC), the Flash Translation Layer (FTL),
and Error Correction Coding (ECC), shown in Figure 1(Left),
all have flexible development tools. The HIC can be implemented using available NVMe frameworks [18], [51]; there
are numerous options for FTLs [8], [39]; and hardware implementations of ECC are also accessible [7], [12].

DRAM

ECC

FTL

Storage
Controller

LUN

Channel
Controller

LUN

LUN

…
…
…

LUN
…

…

SSD

Channel
Controller

Fig. 2
CMD

ADDR

…

DOUT

LUN

Host Interface
Controller

Channel
Controller

NVMe
Commands
and Data

operator waveform

Fig. 1. (Left) A traditional SSD architecture where the HIC interacts with the host, the FTL controls page mapping and management tasks, and the
Storage Controller contains Flash packages. (Center) The Storage Controller organizes Flash LUNs into channels. (Right) The waveform summary used in
the communication between a channel controller and a package. We show a fragment of a waveform in more detail in Figure 2.

We argue that the only component missing a flexible architecture is the Storage Controller. In this paper, we seize
this opportunity and propose a new approach to develop Flash
controllers that embrace the variety of Flash packages. We call
the resulting controller BABOL.
BABOL’s most notable insight is to leverage the significant
delays of NAND Flash memory. Compared to DRAM, in
which the packages can respond to an operation request
in tens of nanoseconds, NAND Flash may require tens of
microseconds to perform an operation. While a given operation
is being executed in a portion of the Storage Controller,
another area may be preparing to issue the next operation.
Thanks to the delays, the latter controller portion may be
software-supported. To the best of our knowledge, BABOL is
the first controller to perform this decoupling while preventing
any significant performance degradation.
We describe BABOL’s architecture and report on a reference
implementation. We discuss how to develop operations in this
environment and show that BABOL does not require significantly more area than a traditional controller. We believe that
BABOL can become the go-to framework for SSD Architects
to build Storage Controllers for existing and potentially future
Flash packages. The controller is fully open-sourced.
The structure of the paper follows its contributions:
• We characterize the difficulty of architecting a hardwarebased storage controller and explain the need for a softwarebased one in Section II.
• In Section III, we present BABOL ’s architecture and highlight its differences compared to classic controllers.
• In Section IV, we present details of BABOL ’s hardware
programmability support.
• In Section V, we discuss how the software portion of
BABOL controls and commands the programmable hardware
described in the previous section.
• We experiment with BABOL using different actual Flash
packages and discuss the results in Section VI.
• We contrast the techniques we introduced in BABOL with
other controllers and other software-hardware co-designed
systems that have a similar structure in Section VII.
Lastly, we present our conclusions in Section VIII.
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
SSD Architecture. As briefly mentioned above, a traditional
SSD architecture is usually comprised of the four components
shown in Figure 1(Left). The Host Interface Controller is
responsible for all communications with the host. In modern
SSDs, this controller implements the NVMe protocol [44]

and uses a DRAM data buffer to stage the data coming in
and out of the device. The HIC requests services from the
Flash Translation Layer, a catch-all component responsible
for, among other things, locating and allocating the physical
addresses of pages and requesting page- or block-level operations that, in turn, are implemented by a Storage Controller
component. Another important component is the one dedicated
to Error Correction Coding. It addresses the fact that Flash
packages are a faulty media [5]. ECC techniques are necessary
to identify and fix some of the errors [42].
A conventional Storage Controller, as depicted in Figure 1(Center), exports a continuous Flash memory address
range to the FTL. Internally, however, it bundles relatively
small and slow Flash packages into a structure called channel.
The goal is to present a faster interface than each individual
package can achieve independently by resorting to parallelism [9]. A typical Flash package carries one or more Logical
Units (LUNs), each of which is capable of performing an
operation independently. A channel gathers a small number of
LUNs together, typically 2 to 16, via a common bus. Because
it is shared, the Storage Controller must schedule the bus usage
whenever it wishes to communicate with one of its attached
LUNs. In other words, while one LUN is busy with, for
instance, fetching a page’s data as part of a READ operation,
the Storage Controller can ask another LUN in the same
channel to start preparing for, say, a READ operation against
a different address that the latter holds. This interleaving of
operations being sent to LUNs through the shared channel is
quite common. We will discuss this interleaving in more detail
shortly. For now, let us concentrate on one operation at a time.
ONFI Operations. The ONFI standard dictates how to interact
with a LUN to request each particular operation. Curiously,
this communication involves several steps. Figure 1(Right)
depicts a sequence of such steps, each of which is represented
by an elongated hexagon. An operation’s first step is to tell the
LUN the desired operation ID.1 This step is called a command
latch. A latch is the term used to refer to the action of asking
the LUN—more precisely, its Flash Array controller—to retain
a piece of information for further use. The next step is usually
to establish the operation’s target address. This step is called
an address latch. Figure 2 depicts the waveform fragment
involved in such latching. Note that several wait times are
1 The standard refers to operations as commands, but in this paper, we
try to distinguish between NVMe commands and ONFI operations whenever
possible. We still use terms such as command latches that refer to an ONFI
operation step, but when we do, we hope that it is clear from the context that
we are discussing ONFI aspects rather than NVMe.

