LIBRA: Memory Bandwidth- and Locality-Aware
Parallel Tile Rendering
Aurora Tomás∗ , Juan L. Aragón† , Joan-Manuel Parcerisa∗ , Antonio González∗
∗ Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

I. I NTRODUCTION
Driven by the increasing demand for high-fidelity animated
graphics applications, dedicated or integrated GPUs are now
found in a variety of devices, including laptops, smartphones,
tablets, smartwatches and AR/VR devices. Users’ demand
for increased realism is insatiable, and graphics applications
use more realistic and sophisticated geometry, lightning and
shadowing models in higher-resolution screens along with
increased refresh rates year over year. To satisfy all these increasing demands, modern GPUs require more computational
power.
In graphics systems, GPUs contain two different parts: a
Geometry Pipeline that transforms the scene’s geometry, and
a Raster Pipeline that computes the final color for each screen
pixel from the transformed geometry. To provide an insight
of where the cycles go when rendering a 3D scene, Figure 1
shows the breakdown of the execution time in a typical GPU
for the set of commercial graphics applications that we have
evaluated (see details in Section IV). We can observe that, on

Raster cycles

Geometry cycles

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

A
AmAt
AnU
AB
BBrc
BR
CClB
CA S
CRm
Co a
CoC
CS
DDrS
FoS
GD2
Go L
GrB
GT
HCra
Ho R
W
Je
Ma t
PV z
RSZ
Ro t
Ro K
S3M
SoD
SuD
TeS
Ti t
VCB
avS
g

Abstract—The increasing demand for high-quality graphics
requires a significant increase in computational power of modern
GPUs. The common approach to follow is augmenting the
number of compute units (i.e., shader cores). However, this
can result in underutilized resources if the workload is not
properly balanced. This is particularly challenging in Tile-Based
Rendering (TBR) GPUs, the predominant architecture in mobile
GPUs, running graphics applications due to limited per-tile
workload.
This work proposes parallel tile rendering to efficiently increase the computational capabilities of TBR GPUs. This solves
the problem of not having enough work to utilize the additional compute units but causes memory-intensive applications
to underperform due to the increased memory pressure. To this
end, we introduce LIBRA, a parallel tile rendering architecture
that includes a novel locality-aware approach to schedule tiles
to Raster Units to evenly distribute memory requests during
the rendering of each frame. This alleviates memory congestion,
therefore, reducing memory access time. LIBRA leverages frameto-frame coherence to predict the memory pressure of each tile of
a frame without penalizing the hit ratio of the cache memories.
Evaluations over a wide range of commercial gaming applications
show that LIBRA reduces the average memory latency by 13.5%
and achieves an average speedup of 20.9%. It also provides an
11.4% improvement in throughput (frames per second) and a
total GPU energy reduction of 9.2%, while adding negligible
overhead.
Index Terms—GPU microarchitecture, Graphics, Scheduling,
Low-power architectures, Locality.

Distribution of GPU time (%)

† Universidad de Murcia

Benchmarks

Fig. 1: Distribution of the execution time in the GPU per
frame. On average, 88% is spent on the raster process.

average, nearly 88% of the time is spent in the raster process
which is the focus of this work.
Since rasterization dominates the execution time, the most
straightforward approach to increase the computing capabilities of modern GPUs and boost their performance is to increase
the number of computing units (also known as shader cores).
However, the lower levels of the memory hierarchy are shared
among these cores and may become a bottleneck, especially
in modern gaming applications employing finer geometry (i.e.,
with more triangles per object) and more detailed and richer
textures, leading to a more intensive memory utilization.
To reduce memory pressure, Tile-Based Rendering (TBR)
architectures are commonly used for mobile GPUs [63]. They
efficiently exploit memory locality by processing small areas
of the screen, called tiles, one by one to avoid many DRAM
accesses by using tile-sized on-chip buffers in charge of storing
the intermediate results. Conventional TBR GPUs are limited
to processing one tile at a time for simplicity, and all the
integrated shader cores are devoted to work on the current tile
[4]. Thus, the addition of more shader cores for augmenting the
overall GPU computing power can sometimes be ineffective
since the limited amount of work in some tiles may result in
underutilized resources.
In this paper, we explore a less conventional approach to
increase the computing resources in a more effective way. The
main idea is to process multiple tiles in parallel. Nevertheless,
this is not trivial because this also implies increasing system
memory pressure, as more cores are sending requests in
parallel, which may lead to a memory bottleneck.
Graphics applications are highly parallel since the computations for each pixel have no dependencies, resulting in the
application being composed of a huge number of threads.

© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00081

(a) Rendered frame

(b) Heatmap of memory accesses

Fig. 2: Example of a rendered frame and the heatmap of the
per-tile DRAM accesses for the game Subway Surfers [72].

The shader cores are designed to exploit this feature by
being highly multithreaded to increase throughput and hide
memory latency. Each shader core has an associated private
L1 cache, which is backed by a shared L2 cache and main
memory (see Section II-C). Rendering multiple tiles in parallel
implies having independent cores that share the access to
the memory hierarchy, which may generate congestion in the
memory subsystem. This may result in longer latency accesses
that cannot be hidden by multithreading which would hurt
performance.
In TBR architectures, tiles can be processed in any order.
Tiles within a frame are not homogeneous since some regions
of a frame have a higher amount of work than others. For
instance, it is very common that some areas of the scene
contain only background (e.g., the sky) whereas other contain
many overlapping objects with a high level of details. Thus,
some tiles will perform many more accesses to the LLC and
DRAM than others. To better illustrate this effect, Figure 2
shows the heatmap of DRAM accesses generated per each tile
for the well-known mobile game Subway Surfers [72]. As it
can be observed, we can identify hot tiles (performing many
memory accesses) that correspond to frame regions where the
main character is located, the status bars (aka HUD), and the
areas where the fences and coins are located. On the other
hand, we can observe cold tiles (performing less memory
accesses) in other areas of the scene with less details (e.g.,
the railways, the station roof, and the station stores). This
imbalance in the access pattern leads to an opportunity and
motivates us to explore novel tile scheduling algorithms based
on these observations to ameliorate memory pressure.
This work proposes LIBRA, a Locality-aware Intelligent
Balance Rendering Architecture that performs parallel tile

rendering in such a way that it processes hot and cold tiles
concurrently to avoid saturating the memory system. It is well
known that the response time of memory increases asymptotically as the utilization factor of the memory bandwidth
approaches 100% so, in general, it is better to have a more
balanced utilization rather than periods with low utilization
followed by others with a very high utilization. On the
other hand, processing far away tiles commonly result in a
detrimental effect on the locality that can be exploited by the
L1 and L2 caches, therefore, LIBRA incorporates a localityaware mechanism to avoid increasing L1 and L2 cache misses.
To achieve this, we need to have a way to predict the
memory pressure that a given tile will generate. Our technique
exploits what is known as frame coherence. To create the
illusion of movement in animated graphics applications, a high
frame rate is required. This results in frames quite similar
to their previous one, which is known as frame-to-frame
coherence [28]. We take advantage of this feature to predict
the memory pressure in a given frame based on the collected
statistics from the previous one.
To summarize, in this paper we propose to boost GPU
performance by first providing an unconventional method for
increasing compute resources. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work exploring parallel tile rendering on GPUs.
Our work makes the following key contributions:
• We propose LIBRA, a novel approach to increase the
computing capabilities of a GPU by processing multiple
tiles in parallel.
• We propose a novel tile scheduler scheme that tries to
keep the memory utilization uniformly distributed across
the execution time by combining tiles with high and low
memory demands, while at the same time not increasing
the miss ratio in the private L1 cache and the shared L2
cache.
• We show that LIBRA provides important benefits in terms
of performance (20.9% improvement), 11.4% increase in
frame rate (frames per second, FPS), and 9.2% decrease
in total GPU energy consumption.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides some background on GPUs. Section III presents
LIBRA. Section IV describes the evaluation methodology.
Section V presents our experimental results and analysis.
Section VI reviews some related work. Finally, Section VII
summarizes the main conclusions of this work.
II. BACKGROUND
TBR architectures were originally proposed to smooth parallel rendering since tiles do not overlap in the scene [26],
[53]. Nowadays, mobile GPUs normally implement a TileBased Rendering (TBR) architecture in order to reduce main
memory accesses. This rendering approach is very popular in
low-power graphics and memory-bandwidth-limited systems.
TBR is characterized by dividing the screen space into a grid
of smaller rectangular regions of adjacent pixels, called tiles.
Tiles are small enough to perform many operations on tilesized on-chip buffers. Since off-chip main memory is usually

