Uncovering Real GPU NoC Characteristics:
Implications on Interconnect Architecture
Zhixian Jin

Christopher Rocca

Jiho Kim

Hans Kasan

KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
kimjihyun@kaist.ac.kr

KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
christopher.rocca@kaist.ac.kr

KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jihokim@kaist.ac.kr

KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
hanskasan@kaist.ac.kr

Minsoo Rhu
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
mrhu@kaist.ac.kr

Ali Bakhoda

Abstract—A critical component of high-throughput processors
such as GPUs is the network-on-chip (NoC) that interconnects
the large number of cores and the memory partitions together.
In this work, we provide a detailed analysis, in terms of latency
and bandwidth, of real GPU NoC across several generations of
modern NVIDIA GPUs. Our analysis identifies how non-uniform
latency exists between the cores and the memory partitions
based on their physical location in the GPU. The non-uniformity
can result in up to approximately 70% difference in on-chip
latency. In comparison, the bandwidth provided from the cores
to the memory partitions is approximately uniform. However,
recent GPUs that consist of multiple GPU “partitions” present
different on-chip latency and bandwidth characteristics when
communicating between the partitions. Based on our analysis
of real GPU interconnect, we discuss potential implications
including its impact on timing used in side-channel attacks as
well as NoC microarchitectures. We show how the non-uniform
latency can be exploited in a timing side-channel attack within
a GPU as the core location impacts performance (or timing).
In addition, proper understanding (and proper assumptions) of
GPU NoC is critical to ensure a network that does not bottleneck
the overall system performance.
Index Terms—GPU, network-on-chip, timing side-channel attack

I. I NTRODUCTION
The acceleration of parallel applications has become a
significant component of modern computing [1]–[3]. These
emerging workloads often require high-throughput architectures such as GPUs, and along with parallel programming
models such as CUDA and OpenCL, they have enabled GPUs
to be widely used across different application domains [4].
To sustain high performance, the GPUs need to support high
compute throughput and high memory bandwidth. A highlevel summary of the recent three generations of NVIDIA
GPUs used in this work is summarized in Table I. The number
of cores (or streaming multiprocessors (SMs)) has increased
to provide high compute throughput and the memory capacity
and bandwidth, as well as on-chip cache, has also significantly
increased. As a result, the network-on-chip(NoC) [5] that interconnects a large number of on-chip components is becoming
a critical component of overall system performance.

John Kim

Tor M. Aamodt

University of British Columbia
Microsoft
Vancouver, Canada
Bellevue, WA, USA
aamodt@ece.ubc.ca
Ali.Bakhoda@Microsoft.com

SMs
TPCs
GPCs
Max SMs / GPC
L2 cache size
L2 cache slices
GPU memory bandwidth
Memory controllers
GPU max clock speed

KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jjk12@kaist.ac.kr

V100
80
40
6
14
6MB
32
0.9TB/s
8
1.38GHz

A100
108
54
7
16
40MB
80
2TB/s
10
1.41GHz

H100
132
66
8
18
50MB
80
3.35TB/s
10
1.755GHz

TABLE I: Microarchitecure comparison of NVIDIA GPUs.
While there has been a lot of research on GPU NoC and
its impact on the overall system performance, most prior
work have focus on simulation-based evaluations and are not
necessarily reflective in NoC found in real GPUs. To the best
of our knowledge, this is one of the first works to provide a
detailed analysis of real, modern GPU NoC. In this work, we
first provide a detailed analysis of modern GPU NoC – both
in terms of latency and throughput (bandwidth). Our analysis
on NVIDIA GPUs shows on “average”, on-chip latency is
similar across all of the cores; however, non-uniform latency
to memory partitions exists in GPU NoC, based on the physical
placement of the cores and the L2 slices. In comparison,
bandwidth to the remote L2 (or the L2 fabric bandwidth)
is approximately uniform regardless of the placement of the
cores and the memory partitions. The recent GPUs (e.g., A100,
H100) that have multiple GPU “partitions” introduce different
characteristics both in terms of latency and bandwidth when
traffic crosses from one partition to the other partition.
Based on the analysis, we explore the implications on two
aspects of GPU architecture – timing side-channel attacks
and GPU NoC microarchitecture. There has been recent work
on timing side-channel attacks in GPUs, based on various
microarchitecture features [6]–[11]. However, timing attacks
are fundamentally based on measuring execution time (or
latency). We show how the non-uniform latency of GPU NoC
can be exploited in timing side-channel attacks to potentially
enable attacks as well as help mitigate side-channel attacks.
In addition, GPU NoC architecture presents unique challenges,
compared to conventional multicore NoC, because of the high-

bandwidth (and high-throughput) that is required to interconnect the components together. Based on the analysis of real
GPUs, we highlight some of the challenges (and opportunities)
in the design of the future GPU NoC as well as pitfalls
when exploring GPU NoC architectures. In particular, the main
contributions of this work include the following.
• We provide a detailed characterization and analysis of
real network-on-chip (NoC) across several generations
of NVIDIA GPUs. One key observation is how latency
can be non-uniform but bandwidth is uniformly provided
between the cores and memory partitions.
• Based on NoC characterization, we show its impact on
timing side-channel attacks and how the non-uniform
latency can be exploited both during the attack as well
as a defense against timing side-channel attacks.
• We also show the impact of NoC assumptions in GPU
architectural explortations to ensure that the on-chip network (or on-chip bandwidth) does not bottleneck overall
system performance.
II. BACKGROUND
A. GPU Architecture
GPU is a highly parallel processor that can execute thousands of threads simultaneously to enable high throughput
processing [12]. A GPU consists of multiple cores or SM
(Streaming Multiprocessor) and memory partitions that are
interconnected together by a network-on-chip (NoC). A GPU
context which is written in a GPU-specific programming
model such as CUDA/OpenCL has multiple thread blocks and
a thread block scheduler [13] schedules each thread block.
In a GPU pipeline, a warp or a group of threads is the unit
of execution and executes the same instruction with different
data for each thread. In addition, multiple warps execute
concurrently based on the warp-scheduling algorithm [14]–
[17]. Each core has a private L1 cache and shared memory, while a globally shared L2 cache is near the memory
controllers. Each memory partition (MP) contains multiple
L2 slices and a memory controller (MC) managing the offchip memory [18], [19]. The NoC interconnects the SMs
with the memory partitions (MPs). The GPU architecture is
hierarchical: within a Texture Processing Cluster (TPC), two
SMs are connected by a multiplexer; 7 to 9 TPCs form a
Graphics Processing Cluster (GPC), and 6 to 8 GPCs form a
GPU [12], [20], [21]. Recent GPUs (e.g., A100, H100) include
a central interconnect that splits the GPU into left and right
“partitions”. In this work, we analyze GPU interconnect and
explore the impact of the NoC on high-throughput processors,
both in terms of latency and bandwidth.
B. Related Work
Analysis of recent GPU systems, including V100 [22] and
A100 [23], have been done and some work has analyzed the
memory hierarchy in GPUs [24]. While these work provides an
in-depth understanding of the various components of a GPU,
they do not provide a detailed analysis of the interconnect
within the GPU. Multi-GPU systems have also been analyzed

Algorithm 1 Latency measurement algorithm.
Inputs

D[ ] : data array loaded into L2
M[ ] : L2 slice to data (D[ ]) index mapping
Output L[ ][ ] : Measured L2 access latency
1: function L2 L ATENCY
2:
for s ← 1 to S do
▷ S: # of L2 slices
3:
idx ← M [s];
4:
for n ← 1 to N do
▷ N : # of cores
5:
start ← clock();
ldcg(&D[idx]);
6:
7:
end ← clock();
8:
L[s][n] ← end − start;

to understand the impact of GPU-to-GPU interconnect [25]–
[27], but their discussion of on-chip interconnect is limited.
Network-on-chip (NoC) for high-throughput processors
presents different challenges compared to multi-core CPU
NoC. Throughput-effective NoC for GPGPUs [28] was proposed where the “reply” network bottleneck was identified
based on the many-to-few-to-many traffic pattern. To address
this bottleneck, alternative NoC architectures [29]–[32] have
been proposed to minimize the impact of the reply network.
To reduce the amount of on-chip traffic, coalescing has been
proposed to reduce the amount of on-chip traffic injected into
the NoC [33]. However, many of these work often assume a
multi-hop network such as a 2D-mesh topology and can result
in an on-chip bandwidth bottleneck.
Recent work [34], [35] have assumed a hierarchical crossbar
organization. To the best of our knowledge, GPU interconnect
in real systems are organized similarly to a hierarchical
crossbar; however, these work do not provide a detailed
analysis of real GPU NoC. More importantly, many prior
work do not consider the impact of the NoC bandwidth on
the L2 bandwidth – i.e., the NoC bandwidth needs to be
provisioned such that sufficient L2 bandwidth can be provided.
Accel-sim [36] also argues how L2 bandwidth is potentially
a bottleneck that prevents more accurate modeling of their
simulator in modern GPUs.
C. Methodology
In this work, we used the three GPUs that were described
earlier (Table I). To analyze the performance impact of GPU
network-on-chip (NoC), synthetic micro-benchmark kernels
were written to isolate the effects of different factors and
components within the GPU. In particular, the measurements
focused on understanding NoC latency and bandwidth.
1) Latency Measurement: A high-level overview of how
latency was measured in this work is shown in Algorithm 1.
Only one thread within one warp is utilized to send a request
to minimize the impact of other components in the GPU –
thus, there is no coalescing and no contention for any resource
within the GPU. The memory access made is guaranteed
to bypass the L1 and unless otherwise stated, the working
set fits within the L2. Memory accesses to D[] are done to
warm up the L2 cache to ensure all accesses hit in L2. The
measured (round-trip) latency includes the core (SM), NoC,
and the L2 access latency. As the measurement is carried out

