Scalar Vector Runahead
Jaime Roelandts† , Ajeya Naithani† , Sam Ainsworth≀ , Timothy M. Jones‡ and Lieven Eeckhout†

I. I NTRODUCTION
The importance of workloads with chains of dependent
memory accesses, as seen in graph analytics, database and
high-performance computing (HPC), has consistently increased over the past few years, which has resulted in significant research efforts to improve their performance [1], [3],
[31], [40], [43], [53]. To execute these workloads efficiently,
the goal is to overlap as many of their cache misses as possible
to hide their memory access latency. The traditional method of
overlapping execution relies on out-of-order (OoO) superscalar
processors, which use a reorder buffer to find independent
work. However, even the largest out-of-order systems struggle
to find enough independent work to achieve good performance
on these challenging workloads [43]. At the same time, out-oforder processors are widely known to be power-hungry [20],
[52], and as a result, today’s edge processors also deploy inorder superscalar cores to reduce energy consumption [21].
Despite edge analytics being increasingly important due
to privacy and latency concerns [45], these in-order cores
struggle immensely with big-data workloads and the indirect

4
3
2
1
0

‡ University of Cambridge, UK

Performance

Energy

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Norm. Energy

Abstract—Modern graph and database processing typically
takes place on high-end servers in data centers. However, with
growing concerns of data privacy, trustworthiness, and all-time
connectivity, there has been a shift toward increased analytics
processing on edge devices such as mobile phones. In an ideal
scenario, we would run these applications on the energy-efficient
in-order cores available in these systems rather than the powerhungry out-of-order cores. However, these applications typically
feature an extremely low computation-to-communication ratio
and irregular memory accesses, meaning their performance is
memory-bound, and out-of-order cores provide significant performance advantages over their in-order counterparts. Although
prior work on Vector Runahead has substantially improved the
performance of graph applications on very large out-of-order
cores, it incurs high complexity and power consumption, so is
unsuitable for energy-efficient in-order processors.
Scalar Vector Runahead (SVR) extracts high memory-level
parallelism on simple in-order cores by piggybacking on existing
instructions executed on the processor leading to future irregular
memory accesses. SVR executes multiple transient, independent,
parallel instances of memory accesses and their chains initiated
from different values of a predicted induction variable to move
mutually independent memory accesses next to each other to hide
dependent stalls. With a hardware overhead of only 2 KiB, SVR
delivers 3.2× higher performance than a baseline 3-wide in-order
core, and 1.3× higher performance than a full out-of-order core,
while halving energy consumption. Increasing the overhead to
9 KiB to account for a larger register file, SVR can extend the
speedup relative to an out-of-order core to 1.7×.
Index Terms—microarchitecture (CPU), data prefetching,
runahead, graph processing

Norm. IPC

≀ University of Edinburgh, UK

In
IMO
OP
SVoO
SV R8
SVR16
SVR32
SV R64
R1
28
In
IMO
OP
SVoO
SV R8
SVR16
SVR32
SV R64
R1
28

† Ghent University, Belgium

Fig. 1: Average speedup (harmonic mean of IPC) and wholesystem energy for various lengths of SVR (16 default) versus
an in-order baseline, an out-of-order core, and IMP [60].
memory accesses seen within. In-order cores are unable to
overlap memory accesses by dynamically rescheduling them,
so have no ability to hide the associated memory latencies: we
see cycles-per-instruction (CPI) as high as 20, and so energy
efficiency can be even lower than for out-of-order cores.
Can we achieve high performance for these challenging
workloads with chains of dependent memory accesses, while
still reaping the energy-efficiency benefits of in-order processing? To answer this question, we take inspiration from
the state-of-the-art in data prefetching on large out-of-order
superscalar microarchitectures, namely Vector Runahead [40],
[43]. The key motivation behind such techniques is that, by
using a stride-load predictor to predict some future memory
accesses, we can spawn many independent chains of dependent
instructions to find many other future memory accesses, thus
using transient execution to prefetch data for standard out-oforder execution. However, the state-of-the-art technique, Decoupled Vector Runahead [43], makes heavy use of resources
only available on large cores: the runahead mode has its own
fully decoupled, dedicated execution context within the core,
that can overlap with the main thread. This context is small
relative to an out-of-order core but would be infeasibly large
next to an in-order core. It also requires very wide vector units
unavailable on small cores, a very large physical register file to
store all the overlapping operations, and out-of-order execution
to efficiently run a ‘discovery pass’ for loop bounds.
Our aim is to take the principles of Vector Runahead and
apply them to small in-order superscalar cores. This requires
rearchitecting the approach, keeping the notion of overlapped
future memory accesses to exploit MLP, but avoiding the need
for a supported vector ISA or a separate runahead context.
Our technique, called Scalar Vector Runahead (SVR), synchronously ‘piggybacks’ off existing instructions executed in
the processor, by opportunistically generating multiple scalar

0 2 4 7 9 12

0

1

Neighbor
1 2 0 3 0 1 3 0 2 0 2 3
array
Vertex
data

2

3
2.939 36.2 801.0 9.136 12.25

4

Fig. 2: A sample graph and its representation in CSR format.
Both the offset and neighbor arrays store values in a contiguous manner. The index of each element in the offset array
represents vertex ID while the value represents the index of
its first neighbor. Values in the neighbor array represent the
index of the elements in the vertex data array.
1
2
3
4
5

for (NodeID u=0; u < g.num_nodes(); u++) {
ScoreT incoming_total = 0;
for (NodeID v : g.in_neigh(u))
incoming_total += outgoing_contrib[v];
}

Listing 1: C++ code for the hot loop in PageRank.

copies of them, each with independent sets of inputs and
dependencies. It keeps track of all the newly interleaved instructions with their own small pool of SRAM, while learning
from dynamic properties of execution to efficiently discover
accurate loop bounds and without relying on out-of-order
execution to calculate properties of future work. It does this
while retaining a simple, strictly in-order execution model.
Compared to a 3-wide in-order core configured after an
ARM Cortex-A510, SVR delivers 3.2 × higher performance
across a variety of memory-latency-bound graph, database
and HPC workloads with its default vector length of 16
and only 2 KiB state. This surpasses even a 3-wide out-oforder (OoO) core by 1.3 ×, rising to 4.3 × and 1.7 × higher
than an in-order and OoO core, respectively, for SVR with
a 128 vector length and 9 KiB state. SVR requires 53%
and 49% lower energy than in-order and out-of-order cores,
respectively (Figure 1). In addition, SVR beats the Indirect
Memory Prefetcher (IMP) [60] by 1.4×. SVR establishes these
speedups without dedicated vector execution units.

15
CPI

Offset
array

other

mem-dram

BFS

CC

in order

out of order

10
5
0

BC

PR

SSSP HPC-DB Avg.

Fig. 3: CPI stacks for workloads with chains of dependent
memory accesses on in-order versus OoO cores. In-order cores
spend 2.5× more cycles waiting for DRAM than OoO cores.
As an example, due to their sparse nature, graph applications
are typically stored a compressed sparse row (CSR) format for
high storage efficiency. As shown in Figure 2, this consists of
three arrays: offset, neighbor, and vertex data [35]. Accesses to
the offset array are sequential while accesses to the neighbor
and vertex data arrays are indirect. Listing 1 shows C++
code accessing the three arrays for PageRank from the GAP
benchmark suite [11]. Line 1 iterates over the nodes, which
is represented by the Offset array in Figure 2, line 3 iterates
over the neighbors of each node, which is represented by the
Neighbor array in Figure 2, and line 4 adds the contribution of
each neighbor to the current node ranking, which is an access
to the Vertex data in Figure 2.
Accesses to g.in_neigh(u) follow a regular sequence,
so they can be picked up by a stride prefetcher, whereas
accesses to outgoing_contrib[v], based on the nonsequential values stored inside g.in_neigh(u), are irregular and highly data-dependent, meaning they persistently miss
in the cache. Although an out-of-order core can accommodate
a few loop iterations simultaneously in its reorder buffer to
extract MLP from multiple dependent chains, it quickly stalls
before it can saturate memory bandwidth. For in-order cores,
the problem is even worse. Even if we assume that the inorder core is stall-on-use rather than stall-on-load, the use of
the cache-missing load will cause the core to pause execution
until the high-latency access to main memory completes. This
effectively inhibits any kind of MLP, causing poor performance.

II. BACKGROUND
A. Sparse Memory Accesses
Many classes of modern workloads feature difficult to
predict, non-sequential memory accesses, based on indexed
lookups, e.g., to sparse matrices (in graph and HPC) or table
data structures (such as the hash tables seen in database
workloads). While these workloads theoretically have high
memory-level parallelism (MLP) at an algorithmic level, this
is difficult to exploit. Large data volumes and low temporal
locality leave modern cache hierarchies underutilized. Because
the accesses are indirect or pointer-chasing, they cannot be
easily prefetched closer to the core in the cache hierarchy.

B. Memory Latency on In-Order Cores
Figure 3 reports the cycles-per-instruction (CPI) for in-order
and OoO cores. As the figure demonstrates, the severity of
the performance impact of indirect memory accesses on an
in-order core is manifold higher than its OoO counterpart.
While the OoO core is stalled for 3.6 CPI on DRAM memory
accesses, the in-order core stalls for a substantially higher 8.9
CPI. This results in a 2.5× slowdown on the in-order relative to
the out-of-order core. Therefore, addressing the performance
bottleneck for applications with indirect memory accesses is
critical on in-order cores.

