arXiv:2501.07767v1 [cs.AR] 14 Jan 2025

HgPCN: A Heterogeneous Architecture for E2E
Embedded Point Cloud Inference
1st Yiming Gao

2nd Chao Jiang

3rd Wesley Piard

University of Florida
gaoyiming@ufl.edu

University of Florida
jc19chaoj@ufl.edu

University of Florida
wespiard@ufl.edu

4th Xiangru Chen

5th Bhavesh Patel

6th Herman Lam*

University of Florida
cxr1994816@ufl.edu

Dell EMC
Bhavesh.A.Patel@dell.com

University of Florida
hlam@ufl.edu

Abstract—Point cloud is an important type of geometric data
structure for many embedded applications such as autonomous
driving and augmented reality. Current Point Cloud Networks
(PCNs) have proven to achieve great success in using inference to
perform point cloud analysis, including object part segmentation,
shape classification, and so on. However, point cloud applications
on the computing edge require more than just the inference
step. They require an end-to-end (E2E) processing of the point
cloud workloads: pre-processing of raw data, input preparation,
and inference to perform point cloud analysis. Current PCN
approaches to support end-to-end processing of point cloud
workload cannot meet the real-time latency requirement on the
edge, i.e., the ability of the AI service to keep up with the speed
of raw data generation by 3D sensors.
Latency for end-to-end processing of the point cloud workloads
stems from two reasons: memory-intensive down-sampling in the
pre-processing phase and the data structuring step for input
preparation in the inference phase. In this paper, we present
HgPCN, an end-to-end heterogeneous architecture for real-time
embedded point cloud applications. In HgPCN, we introduce
two novel methodologies based on spatial indexing to address
the two identified bottlenecks. In the Pre-processing Engine
of HgPCN, an Octree-Indexed-Sampling method is used to
optimize the memory-intensive down-sampling bottleneck of the
pre-processing phase. In the Inference Engine, HgPCN extends
a commercial DLA with a customized Data Structuring Unit
which is based on a Voxel-Expanded Gathering method to
fundamentally reduce the workload of the data structuring step
in the inference phase.
The initial prototype of HgPCN has been implemented on
an Intel PAC (Xeon+FPGA) platform. Four commonly available
point cloud datasets were used for comparison, running on
three baseline devices: Intel Xeon W-2255, Nvidia Xavier NX
Jetson GPU, and Nvidia 4060ti GPU. These point cloud datasets
were also run on two existing PCN accelerators for comparison: PointACC and Mesorasi. Our results show that for the
inference phase, depending on the dataset size, HgPCN achieves
speedup from 1.3× to 10.2× vs. PointACC, 2.2× to 16.5× vs.
Mesorasi, and 6.4× to 21× vs. Jetson NX GPU. Along with
optimization of the memory-intensive down-sampling bottleneck
in pre-processing phase, the overall latency shows that HgPCN
can reach the real-time requirement by providing end-to-end
service with keeping up with the raw data generation rate.
This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Center for Space, High-Performance, and Resilient Computing
(SHREC) through the IUCRC Program under Grant No. CNS-1738420.

Index Terms—Heterogeneous Computing, Edge AI Service,
Point Cloud Network Inference

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the development of 3D sensors, such as LiDARs,
and RGB-D cameras, there are increased interests in research
and development of processing point cloud data. Point Cloud
Networks (PCNs) have proven to achieve great success in
different tasks of point cloud analysis, including object part
segmentation, shape classification, and so on. Point cloud applications on the computing edge, such as autonomous robotics
and drones, have stringent real-time requirements. Many PCNs
for point cloud AI tasks have been proposed [9], including
DSA (Domain-Specific Architecture) PCN accelerators such
as Mesorasi [6], PointACC [16], and Crescent [5], which have
been proposed to accelerate PCN inference. However, point
cloud applications on the computing edge require more than
just the inference step. They require an end-to-end processing
of the point cloud workloads. A recent paper [23] indicated
that the processing of AI services for edge computing suffer
the problem of high “AI tax”, which includes the supporting
steps for AI workload such as pre-processing of raw data,
input preparation, and offloading communication overhead.
These steps contribute to a major part of overall latency in
edge AI services. Unfortunately, this high “AI tax” problem is
more serious for point cloud applications. Due to the inherent
irregularity and large size of raw point cloud data, the preprocessing and communication overhead of point cloud data
are far more expensive than traditional data types, such as
image or video. Due to the high AI-tax, the current PCN
approaches to support end-to-end processing of point cloud
workload cannot meet the real-time requirement [10], i.e., the
ability of the AI service to keep up with the speed of raw data
generation by 3D sensors. In PCN edge services, the AI tax
is mainly stemmed from two reasons: the expensive downsampling pre-processing phase and the data structuring step
for input preparation in the inference phase.
As shown in Figure 1(a), an end-to-end point cloud AI
service based on PCNs comprise of two major phases after
raw data generation: pre-processing of the point cloud data

Fig. 1. (a) Two phases of an end-to-end point clouds AI service (classification
task), (b) Overall architecture to process the two phases.

and PCN inference. After obtaining the raw point cloud data
from the sensor, the size of the raw data is enormous: e.g.,
for every frame, a LiDAR sensor produces approximately 2
million points. Also, the number of points in each frame
is highly irregular because different objects have different
reflectivity to the laser. Thus, point cloud applications on the
edge require an effective front-end pre-processing phase to
deal with this kind of irregularity before feeding the data
into the PCN for inference. For each frame, it has to be
down-sampled from million-level, variable-number points into
thousands-level, fixed number points (e.g., 4096 points per
frame to feed into the input layer of a PCN). Because of
the large amounts of points in raw point cloud data and
expensive nature of down-sampling methods, down-sampling
pre-processing is extremely memory intensive and is a major
bottleneck in a real-time point cloud application.
As a type of Deep Neural Network (DNN), the backend
PCN inference phase is a computationally intensive task. In
recent years, there have been much advance in Deep Learning
Accelerators (DLAs), including commercially available DLAs
[2], which perform well in satisfying the computationally intensive inference requirements of traditional DNNs. However,
current DLAs cannot be directly applied to PCN inference.
The reason is, unlike traditional dense data types, points in
a point cloud are sparsely distributed in a 3D space [9],
[28]. Thus, before the actual feature computation with MVM
(matrix-vector multiplication), an additional step, data structuring, is necessary to adapt the spatial sparsity of the point
cloud and prepare the input for the following convolutional
layers. The data structuring step is not supported by current
DLAs. However, if unaccelerated, this step results in a nontrivial part of the total computation of PCN inference. Data
structuring before feature computation is the second major
bottleneck in a real-time point cloud application.
Current general-purpose architectures fail to effectively
solve these two bottlenecks of end-to-end point cloud AI

services for real-time applications. For example, the most commonly used down-sampling pre-processing method, farthestpoint sampling (FPS), takes over 200 seconds to sample 10%
of 1 million points [10] on GPUs. For CPUs, such enormous
amount of computation is rather slow because their limited
parallel capability. We will show in Section III that the downsampling pre-processing phase occupies a major part of the
end-to-end latency, which greatly exacerbating the problem of
high “AI tax” [23].
Currently, there is a very limited number of hardware-based
designs for point cloud accelerators [6], [16]. Furthermore,
these works do not provide a complete solution since they do
not fully consider the two bottlenecks. They focus solely on the
AI (inference) phase, based on the assumption that the input is
already down-sampled (pre-processed) and restructured. More
details on these previous works will be given in Section II.
In this paper, we first identify the workload characteristics
and bottlenecks of the two major phases of end-to-end point
cloud edge applications. The frontend pre-processing phase
is a memory-intensive task, whereas the backend inference
phase is a computationally intensive task. The workload characteristics are discussed in Section III. An overall architecture
for HgPCN to support end-to-end processing of point-cloud
applications is presented in Section IV.
To enable the real-time PCN process in HgPCN, we introduce two novel methodologies to replace the brute-force traditional pre-processing and data structuring methods (introduced
in Section II) by converting them into efficient Octree-based
spatial query. To address the memory-intensive bottleneck
in the pre-processing phase, we develop an Octree-IndexedSampling (OIS) method. The OIS method uses an Octree
data structure as a spatial index [25] to organize the point
cloud data in memory. With an Octree pre-organization, downsampling can be done with only reading out the desired aftersampled points among raw point cloud data from the memory,
eliminating the need for repetitive access of input and intermediate data from memory. In the HgPCN architecture, the OIS
method is implemented in the Pre-processing Engine shown
in Figure 1(b), which comprised of the Octree-Build Unit in
the CPU and the Down-sampling Unit in the accelerator (e.g.,
FPGA). The design and implementation of the Pre-processing
Engine are described in detail in Section V.
For the Inference phase, we develop an Octree-based VoxelExpanded Gathering (VEG) method to optimize the data
structuring step. In our prototype implementation, the Inference Engine (shown in Figure 1(b)) will make use of
a commercially available DLA. It will be enhanced by a
Data Structuring Unit (DSU) to form the PCN Inference
Accelerator. As described in more detail in Section VI, the
Data Structuring Unit is based on the VEG method and
fundamentally reduces the workload of the data structuring
step as compared against current methods.
The initial prototype of HgPCN has been implemented on
an Intel PAC (Xeon+FPGA) platform. The evaluation of the
HgPCN prototype is performed using four modern point cloud
datasets: ModelNet40 [27], ShapeNet [1], S3DIS [15], and

