S TAR NUMA: Mitigating NUMA Challenges
with Memory Pooling
Albert Cho

Alexandros Daglis

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
acho44@gatech.edu

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
alexandros.daglis@cc.gatech.edu

In a typical HPE or IBM 16-socket system, the gap between
the slowest and fastest memory access exceeds 4×, with an
unloaded remote memory access latency of up to 360ns [10],
[31]. This latency disparity is further exacerbated in a loaded
system, as remote memory access is severely bound by intersocket bandwidth constraints, introducing considerable queuing delays. Techniques that minimize remote memory accesses
via intelligent data placement and migrations are therefore
essential in large NUMA systems. Unfortunately, some important workloads, such as graphs [3], exhibit challenging
irregular access patterns, resulting in a significant fraction
of data pages without an evident “home” socket location
due to high sharing degree. We call such pages vagabond.
Vagabond pages hurt performance by incurring many costly
remote memory accesses and/or excessive migrations.
To address the challenge of vagabond page placement,
we propose the S TAR NUMA architecture, which extends a
typical multi-socket system with a shared memory pool that is
directly accessible by every socket in a single high-bandwidth
interconnect hop. By leveraging a page hotness monitoring
and migration mechanism that considers this new architectural
block, vagabond pages can be identified and placed in the pool,
thus minimizing costly multi-hop remote memory accesses.
Compared to a baseline NUMA system, shared direct access
to such a pool provides lower average unloaded latency and
higher bandwidth availability for remote memory accesses.
Recent technological trends render S TAR NUMA a timely
and practical solution. The emerging Compute Express Link
(CXL) interconnect [18], based on a widely adopted open industry standard, supports all the required features to construct
S TAR NUMA’s low-latency and high-bandwidth memory pool.
First, CXL supports coherent sharing of disaggregated memory
across multiple sockets. Second, for the contained scale of our
target multi-socket systems, CXL’s performance characteristics
allow direct connectivity of every socket to the memory
pool, at a 2× lower unloaded latency than the highest multihop latency of the baseline system (180ns [38], [46], [56]
versus 360ns [10], [31]). Third, CXL is a high-bandwidth
interconnect, offering 8GB/s per direction per lane (when
operating over PCIe 6.0), with the capability of grouping
multiple lanes together at a modest requirement of only four
processor pins per lane [2], [56].
By selectively placing vagabond pages in its memory pool,

Abstract—Large multi-socket machines are mission-critical
high-performance systems for workloads requiring massive memory shared by hundreds of processors. Beyond eight sockets,
such systems typically feature multi-hop inter-socket networks,
exacerbating the Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) challenge. NUMA effects stem from major disparity in latency and
bandwidth characteristics of local and remote memory, often
in the 4–10× range. While judicious data placement across the
distributed memory’s fragments can ameliorate NUMA effects,
we observe that in challenging workloads with irregular access
patterns, a large fraction of accessed pages are “vagabond”:
being actively shared by multiple sockets, they lack a fitting
home socket location. On 16-socket systems, such pages incur
up to 75% remote memory accesses, which encounter significant
latency overheads and bandwidth bottlenecks.
S TAR NUMA introduces a new architectural block for multisocket architectures to ameliorate the challenge posed by
vagabond pages. By leveraging the capabilities of the emerging
CXL interconnect, S TAR NUMA augments a typical NUMA architecture with a memory pool that is directly accessible by every
socket in a single high-bandwidth interconnect hop. We show that
placement of vagabond pages in S TAR NUMA’s memory pool
effectively curbs the latency overheads and queuing delays of the
bandwidth-constrained multi-hop inter-socket network, reducing
the average memory access time of 16-socket systems by 48%. In
turn, faster memory access yields performance improvements of
1.54× on average, and up to 2.17×.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Enterprises employ multi-socket systems for workloads requiring many cores and massive shared memory. While the
multi-socket system market is dominated by two- to foursocket machines, there is a niche, yet critically important need
for large-scale systems of eight sockets or more. Such missioncritical systems are typically used in high-performance computing (HPC) and transaction processing/banking environments that require thousands of threads with direct access to
terabytes of shared memory. Despite driving a small portion of
the server market’s volume, large-scale multi-socket systems
represent a market of $5 billion in annual revenue [59].
Scaling beyond four sockets typically involves hierarchical
networks, exacerbating the challenge of Non-Uniform Memory Accesses (NUMA). While every processor can directly
access any memory location, memory access latency and bandwidth characteristics drastically depend on the target memory
location’s distance from the accessing processor, as a function
of the path and hop count taken on the coherent interconnect.

1

