Unleashing CPU Potential for Executing GPU
Programs through Compiler/Runtime Optimizations
Ruobing Han

Jisheng Zhao

Hyesoon Kim

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, USA
hanruobing@gatech.edu

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, USA
jisheng.zhao@cc.gatech.edu

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, USA
hyesoon@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract—Although modern CPUs deliver high performance,
they are often under-utilized in CPU-GPU heterogeneous systems.
Enabling CPUs to execute GPU programs facilitates workload
sharing between CPUs and GPUs, which can increase CPU device
utilization and overall benefit heterogeneous systems.
The flat collapsing transformation represents a state-of-theart solution for GPU-to-CPU migration and is widely accepted
in both academic and commercial projects. However, in this
paper, we identify that CPU programs transformed by flat
collapsing transformation are not compatible with standard
CPU compiler optimizations and runtime environments, which
leads to suboptimal performance. Based on the observation, we
propose four compiler/runtime optimizations. These optimizations
complement flat collapsing transformation and help generate highperformance programs. Our evaluations demonstrate an average
performance improvement of 20.84% over the state-of-the-art
framework on an x86 CPU and 16.10% on an ARM CPU.

threads. MCUDA [49] proposes a compiler transformation that
wraps the workload of an entire GPU block and executes it
using a single CPU thread. This transformation, named ’flat
collapsing transformation’ in [23], enhances performance compared to directly mapping one GPU thread to
one CPU thread by reducing the overhead of thread context
switching and better utilizing the vector units in CPU cores. An
example of flat collapsing transformation is demonstrated in
Figure 1. The flat collapsing transformation can be implemented
using either a source-to-source translator [9], [49] or lowlevel Intermediate Representation (IR) transformation [12],
[21], [23], [40]. We use a CUDA-to-OpenMP example to
demonstrate how flat collapsing transformation aims to utilize
CPU computational resources for executing GPU programs.

I. I NTRODUCTION
For the stereotype of CPU-GPU heterogeneous systems,
GPUs are the predominant devices for executing massively
computing applications, while CPUs are primarily required to
provide more accessible options to users. However, it is often
overlooked that CPUs also provide a substantial amount of
computational resources. For example, the latest Intel Gold
6423N [6] and AMD EPYC 9654P [5] CPUs feature 28 and 96
CPU cores, respectively, along with AVX support, providing
up to 6.5 and 10.9 TFLOPS/sec of computational power.
Similarly, ARM-based CPUs like Fujitsu’s A64FX deliver a
peak performance of 5.4 TFLOPS/sec [2]. These CPUs achieve
peak data processing performance at a magnitude similar to that
of NVIDIA A100 GPUs, which offer 19.5 TFLOPS [4]. This
implies that, with full utilization of the performance capabilities,
CPUs might achieve performance comparable to GPUs.
Although CPUs provide a substantial amount of computational resources, they are consistently underutilized in
heterogeneous systems. It is not surprising to find users waiting
for hours to have GPU devices scheduled while many CPUs
remain idle. This observation raises an important question:
"Can CPUs be effectively utilized to run GPU applications?"
GPU programs typically consist of a large number of
lightweight parallel tasks, whereas CPUs are designed to handle
a relatively small number of heavy workloads. Running GPU
programs on CPUs requires transforming programs designed for
the bulk-synchronous parallel model into traditional programming models, which do not support a high number of active

Fig. 1: An example of a CUDA program and the corresponding
CPU program transformed by flat collapsing transformation.
The workflow for existing GPU-to-CPU solutions [3], [21],
[23], [27], [49] is illustrated by the solid black line in Figure 2.
Initially, GPU programs are transformed into CPU programs
using flat collapsing transformation. These generated CPU
programs are then subjected to standard compiler optimizations.
Finally, runtime libraries that implement GPU APIs (e.g.,
cudaMalloc, cudaMemcpy, kernel launch) with equivalent CPU
functions are linked to produce executable CPU files.
However, in this paper, we highlight that this pipeline
does not effectively utilize the computational potential of
CPUs for two main reasons. First, the CPU programs are
transformed from GPU programs, which are optimized for GPU

II. BACKGROUND
A. Flat Collapsing Transformation

Fig. 2: The existing GPU-to-CPU migration process is depicted
in black text. We propose four optimizations, highlighted in
green text, which can be integrated into this workflow.

architectures. Some GPU optimizations do not benefit CPU
architectures. Second, the existing pipeline treats transformed
CPU programs as ordinary CPU programs and optimizes them
with standard compiler optimizations. However, CPU programs
transformed by flat collapsing transformation are usually more
complex than manually written CPU programs. Therefore, the
existing compiler optimizations are too general to effectively
optimize these programs.
Based on these observations, we propose four compiler/runtime optimizations designed to enhance the performance of
transformed CPU programs. These optimizations, which are
compatible with flat collapsing transformation and highlighted
in green in Figure 2, specifically address key inefficiencies.
The anti-coalescing transformation and tail block adaptive
synchronization are compiler transformations applied to GPU
programs, while block size invariant analysis is a transformation
applied to CPU programs. GPU-block dynamic tiling is a
runtime optimization that targets the kernel launch function.
This paper offers several noteworthy contributions:
Identification of unresolved efficiency challenges in existing GPU-to-CPU migration solutions.
• Introduction of three compiler optimizations designed to
enhance the performance of generated CPU programs.
• Introduction of a runtime optimization that dynamically
adjusts the workload distribution to optimally align with
CPU computational resources.
• Integration of the proposed optimizations into a stateof-the-art GPU-to-CPU solution, resulting in significant
performance improvements on both x86 (20.84%) and
ARM CPUs (16.10%).

•

In this paper, we focus on migrating CUDA applications to
CPUs. However, the proposed optimizations are not limited
to any specific programming languages. Consequently, the
technical contributions are also applicable to other parallel
programming models (e.g., HIP [1], OpenCL [41]) and libraries
(e.g., OCCA [38], Kokkos [51]).

GPUs are designed to handle the efficient execution of a large
number of lightweight tasks, while CPUs are optimized for a
smaller quantity of heavy tasks. To reconcile the disparity in
parallelism and workload granularity, MCUDA [49] introduces
a compiler transformation referred to as the flat collapsing
transformation. The transformation aims to migrate GPU
programs to CPUs in an efficient manner. Essentially, the
flat collapsing transformation wraps the workload in a CUDA
block into a CPU function to be executed by a CPU thread.
Figure 1 showcases a CUDA application and the CPU program
transformed by the flat collapsing transformation.
There are several important points to note in this example.
Firstly, all CUDA blocks are transformed into iterations within
a loop in the main function of the transformed CPU program,
with length equals to the grid size, allowing parallelization
across multiple CPU threads. Secondly, the CUDA threads
are also transformed into iterations within loops, with lengths
equivalent to the block size. These loops can be vectorized
using SIMD instructions. We call these loops flat loops in
this paper. Thirdly, the CUDA shared memory variable s is
mapped to CPU thread-local memory. Fourthly, a barrier is
present in the CUDA program (line 5th), causing the flat
collapsing transformation to generate two sequential flat loops
that wrap the CUDA code before (line 3-4th) and after the
barrier (line 6th). Lastly, the local variable idx is extended to
arrays with lengths equal to the CUDA block size, as they are
referenced in both flat loops. This transformation is critical for
maintaining the correctness of flat collapsing transformation,
which is called ’selective replication’ in MCUDA [49]. The
insight is that, after migrating to a CPU program, where a
CPU thread needs to execute a GPU block workload, the CPU
thread should create arrays to store local variables of each
GPU thread in the block.
In general, flat collapsing transformation is a compiler
transformation that groups multiple parallel fine-grained workloads into a single coarse-grained task. It reduces the number
of parallel tasks by increasing the workload of each task,
thereby bridging the gap between the number of concurrent
threads required by software developers and the concurrent
cores supported by hardware. Similar transformations are
utilized to improve the runtime of GPU programs [8] or to
support performance portability of SPMD languages on devices
with less parallelism [23], [27], [31]. Thus, we believe the
optimizations proposed in this paper can also be extended for
GPU-to-GPU transformations and projects aimed at SPMD
performance portability.
B. Challenges for Existing Solutions
Although flat collapsing transformation is expected to
generate programs suitable for CPUs, we find that the generated
CPU programs consistently exhibit suboptimal performance.
The low performance stems from two main reasons. First,
the original GPU programs are designed for utilizing GPU

