arXiv:2409.16633v1 [cs.AR] 25 Sep 2024

PIFS-Rec: Process-In-Fabric-Switch for Large-Scale
Recommendation System Inferences
Pingyi Huo

Anusha Devulapally

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
pqh5140@psu.edu

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
akd5994@psu.edu

Hasan Al Maruf

Minseo Park

AMD, Inc
AMD, Inc
Austin, TX, USA
Austin, TX, USA
hasan.maruf@amd.com minseo.park@amd.com

Krishnakumar Nair

Meena Arunachalam

Gulsum Gudukbay Akbulut

AMD, Inc
Austin, TX, USA
krishnakumar.nair@amd.com

AMD, Inc
Austin, TX, USA
meena.arunachalam@amd.com

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
gulsum@psu.edu

Mahmut Taylan Kandemir

Vijaykrishnan Narayanan

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
mtk2@psu.edu

The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
vxn9@psu.edu

Abstract—Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRMs)
have become increasingly popular and prevalent in today’s
datacenters, consuming most of the AI inference cycles. The
performance of DLRMs is heavily influenced by available bandwidth due to their large vector sizes in embedding tables and
concurrent accesses. To achieve substantial improvements over
existing solutions, novel approaches towards DLRM optimization
are needed, especially, in the context of emerging interconnect
technologies like CXL. This study delves into exploring CXLenabled systems, implementing a process-in-fabric-switch (PIFS)
solution to accelerate DLRMs while optimizing their memory and
bandwidth scalability. We present an in-depth characterization of
industry-scale DLRM workloads running on CXL-ready systems,
identifying the predominant bottlenecks in existing CXL systems.
We, therefore, propose PIFS-Rec, a PIFS-based scheme that
implements near-data processing through downstream ports of
the fabric switch. PIFS-Rec achieves a latency that is 3.89× lower
than Pond, an industry-standard CXL-based system, and also
outperforms BEACON, a state-of-the-art scheme, by 2.03×.
Index Terms—Recommendation System, Compute eXpress
Link, Software-Hardware Co-design, Memory Pooling.

Among various deployed models [2]–[4], Deep Learning
Recommendation Models (DLRMs) stand out due to their
unique characteristics: unlike their compute-heavy counterparts, DLRMs are predominantly bandwidth-intensive due
to their large embedding table accumulations [5]–[8]. This
distinction shifts the performance bottleneck from compute capacity to data bandwidth and transfer efficiency. The research
community and industry have proposed several hardwarebased solutions, such as Process-near-Memory (PNM) [7],
[9]–[12] and ASIC designs [13] to address these challenges.
However, these solutions introduce new challenges. Firstly,
the ever-expanding size of industrial DLRM models, now
surpassing even the most significant Large Language Models
(LLMs) [14]–[16], poses a significant challenge to the scalability of PNM and ASIC solutions, due to the limited physical
interface on boards. Secondly, the PNM-based solutions, by
their nature, diverge from standard DRAM protocols [17].
Consequently, adapting to these memory technologies may
demand extensive hardware and software stack modifications [10], [18]–[20], elevating development costs and extending the product development cycle. Thirdly, they also introduce
resource inefficiency – with shared memory capabilities at
the board level, the PNM solutions can serve limited sockets
per board. This limitation may cause redundant data copies
within a rack or even across racks [21]–[23] to facilitate multihost access, leading to inefficient memory usage and increased
latency, despite the advancements like RDMA [15], [24].
Compute Express Link (CXL) technology [25] is rapidly
gaining traction in the contemporary datacenter landscape,
setting a new standard in the industry. It ensures cache
coherence over the PCIe physical layer and introduces memory
pooling by using fabric switch [26]. This advancement offers

I. I NTRODUCTION
Personalized recommendation systems have emerged as a
cornerstone in the interface between users and technology,
spanning various application domains from e-commerce to social networking [1]. These systems, powered by deep learning
techniques, sift through vast user data to deliver tailored content. This personalized approach boosts user engagement and
significantly enhances overall satisfaction. As these systems
become increasingly essential components of our digital experiences, datacenters worldwide are scaling up their capabilities,
dedicating extensive resources to the AI inference tasks that
underpin recommendation models.

enhanced memory scalability and utilization, leading towards
a new data processing and management era. Furthermore,
recent studies emphasize CXL’s capability to operate as a
separate and independent memory bandwidth source [27],
[28], significantly enhancing the system’s overall bandwidth
availability. Together, these features provide a robust foundation for accelerating DLRMs at the datacenter scale.
Motivated by these observations, this study leverages the
capabilities of the CXL standard (bandwidth/memory expander) and its interconnects to accelerate DLRMs. We present
PIFS-Rec (Process-In-Fabric-Switch for Recommendation
Systems), a scalable, near-data processing capability tailored
for fabric switch hardware. Focusing on large-scale industrial
DLRM inference systems, PIFS-Rec utilizes the scalability
of downstream ports [25], [29] and proximity to memory
within the CXL fabric switch [25] to accelerate the embedding
table operations. Through minimal hardware and software optimizations within the fabric switch, we extend its capabilities
beyond current implementations, including DRAM-based Type
3 memory expanders [30]–[32]. Our design (§IV) enhances
existing CXL memory systems by leveraging the “scalable
bandwidth” of fabric switches to address bandwidth bottlenecks in embedding table accesses of DLRM. This boosts
performance through enhanced device-level I/O utilization and
parallelization. Additionally, we explore integrating a processon-a-fabric-switch framework to reduce data movement costs.
Our main contributions in this work are as follows:
• We present results from a characterization study that
analyzes recommendation models using real-industrial access
traces, production-scale DLRM models, and CXL-ready system. We quantitatively assess the bottlenecks of CXL-enabled
memory pooling as well as the potential opportunities it brings.
• We introduce PIFS-Rec, a scalable near-data processing
approach customized for fabric switch hardware. Our optimizations include hardware and software enhancements such
as data repacking, snooping mechanisms, on-switch buffer
implementation, and optimized compute logic. Additionally,
we explore software-assisted page management strategies to
enhance the efficiency of the DLRM processing pipeline.
• We use open-sourced industrial DLRM traces to quantify
the effectiveness of our optimizations. We find that PIFSRec outperforms an existing CXL-based system, Pond [26]
by 3.89× and a state-of-the-art comparable design, BEACON [33] by 2.03× in terms of latency.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORKS
A. Deep Learning Recommendation Model (DLRM)
The end-to-end inference in DLRM involves several stages.
Initially, the recommendation model is loaded into DRAM.
Incoming input queries are grouped into batches, and the
necessary dense and sparse features are organized for input
into the DLRM. The inference step then processes these
batches to generate predictions. In a DLRM architecture, four
key stages can be identified: the bottom fully-connected layer
(Bottom MLP), embedding lookup, feature interaction, and
top fully-connected layer (Top MLP), as depicted in Figure 1.

Dense Feature

Dimension of a embedding vector

Bottom
MLP

Click Through Rate

feature indexing

Selected row

Feature
Interaction

Top
MLP

feature indexing

Selected row

Embedding
Table Lookup

feature indexing

Selected row

(CTR%)

Bandwidth
Constrained

e.g 64KB per row

64KB
Accumulation
Result

Lookup,bag size =3

Sparse Feature

Fig. 1. End-to-end DLRM pipeline for inference.

This architecture handles two types of input features: “dense
features” which are continuous personal variables (e.g., age,
gender), and “sparse features” which are categorical (e.g.,
product IDs, music genres). During the inference process,
dense features undergo processing by the Bottom MLP. On the
other hand, sparse features are transformed into “dense latent
representation” in the embedding lookup stage. Each feature’s
value or indices are used to retrieve the corresponding “embedding vector” from a large table. Embedding vectors can be of
different dimensions (e.g., 16B, 32B, etc.) in different setups;
high embedding dimensions and the number of embeddings
lead to large memory footprints. The outputs from the Bottom
MLP and the embedding lookup are combined in the feature
interaction layer to calculate interactions before being passed
to the Top MLP for determining the click-through rate (CTR).
B. CXL Overview
1) Conventional CXL: CXL operates as a transaction layer
designed for rack-level memory pooling [26], building upon
the physical layer of PCIe. PCIe 5.0 supports a data transfer
rate of 32 GT/s per lane, translating to approximately 64GB/s
when utilizing 16× lanes. As CXL uses PCIe’s physical
layer, unlike RDMA, it does not require a device’s DMA
engine or Network Interface Card (NIC). CXL encompasses
three protocols: “CXL.io”, “CXL.cache”, and “CXL.mem”.
The CXL.io protocol configures and establishes connections
between CPUs and CXL devices. In contrast, the CXL.cache
(resp. CXL.mem) protocol enables a device to access the host
CPU cache (resp. memory) and vice versa. These protocols
enable three types of CXL devices: Type 1 (only cache, e.g.,
NIC), Type 2 (both cache and memory, e.g., GPU, accelerator,
etc.), and Type 3 (only memory, e.g., memory expander).
Memory Expander. Type 3 devices also known as CXL
memory expanders [31], [32], are designed to increase both
memory capacity [34] and bandwidth [27]. These conventional
expanders include DDR memory and rely on the CXL.mem
protocol for data storage and retrieval, as well as the CXL.io
protocol for establishing the connections. This protocol enables CPU-to-device memory access, coordinated by a Home
Agent (HA) and a CXL controller within the host and device.
The HA manages the CXL.mem protocol, presenting memory
to the CPU as if it were on a remote NUMA node, allowing
direct access via standard load/store commands.
Memory Pooling. CXL enables memory pooling where
each host and end device can access any shared, unified

