Manuscript version: Author’s Accepted Manuscript
The version presented in WRAP is the author’s accepted manuscript and may differ from the
published version or Version of Record.
Persistent WRAP URL:
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/187991
How to cite:
Please refer to published version for the most recent bibliographic citation information.
If a published version is known of, the repository item page linked to above, will contain
details on accessing it.
Copyright and reuse:
The Warwick Research Archive Portal (WRAP) makes this work by researchers of the
University of Warwick available open access under the following conditions.
Copyright © and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the
individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. To the extent reasonable and
practicable the material made available in WRAP has been checked for eligibility before
being made available.
Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit
purposes without prior permission or charge. Provided that the authors, title and full
bibliographic details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata
page and the content is not changed in any way.
Publisher’s statement:
Please refer to the repository item page, publisher’s statement section, for further
information.
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk.

warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications

RAHP: A Redundancy-aware Accelerator for
High-performance Hypergraph Neural Network
Hui Yu† , Yu Zhang† , Ligang He§ , Yingqi Zhao† , Xintao Li† , Ruida Xin† , Jin Zhao† , Xiaofei Liao† ,
Haikun Liu† , Bingsheng He‡ , Hai Jin†
†

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
Service Computing Technology and System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
§
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, United Kingdom
‡
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{huiy, zhyu, yqzhao2001, xtli, ruidaxin, zjin, xfliao, hkliu, hjin}@hust.edu.cn, ligang.he@warwick.ac.uk, hebs@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract—Hypergraph Neural Network (HyperGNN) has
emerged as a potent methodology for dissecting intricate
multilateral connections among various entities. Current software/hardware solutions leverage a sequential execution model
that relies on hyperedge and vertex indices for conducting standard matrix operations for HyperGNN inference. Yet, they are
impeded by the dual challenges of redundant computation and irregular memory access overheads. This is primarily due to the frequent and repetitive access and updating of a number of feature
vectors corresponding to the same hyperedges and vertices. To
address these challenges, we propose the first redundancy-aware
accelerator, RAHP, which enables high performance execution
of HyperGNN inference. Specifically, we present a redundancyaware asynchronous execution approach into the accelerator
design for HyperGNN to reduce redundant computations and
off-chip memory accesses. To unveil opportunities for data reuse
and unlock the parallelism that existing HyperGNN solutions
fail to capture, it prioritizes vertices with the highest degree as
roots, prefetching other vertices along the hypergraph structure
to capture the common vertices among multiple hyperedges,
and synchronizing the computations of hyperedges and vertices
in real-time. By such means, this facilitates the concurrent
processing of relevant hyperedge and vertex computations of
the common vertices along the hypergraph topology, resulting
in smaller redundant computations overhead. Furthermore, by
efficiently caching intermediate results of the common vertices,
it curtails memory traffic and off-chip communications. To fully
harness the performance potential of our proposed approach
in the accelerator, RAHP incorporates a topology-driven data
loading mechanism to minimize off-chip memory accesses on the
fly. It is also endowed with an adaptive data synchronization
scheme to mitigate the effects of conflicting updates of both
hyperedges and vertices. Moreover, RAHP employs the similaritybased data caching strategy to further mitigate the overhead of
redundant data transfers. We have implemented and assessed
RAHP on a Xilinx Alveo U280 FPGA card. Experimental
evaluations demonstrate that RAHP achieves average speedups
of 439.2x and 64.7x for HyperGNN inference, alongside average
energy savings of 542.8x and 84.2x, compared to the cuttingedge software-based HyperGNN implementations on Intel Xeon
CPUs and NVIDIA A100 GPUs, respectively. Additionally, in the
realm of HyperGNN inference, RAHP secures average speedups
of 7.8x, 5.4x, and 3.8x, and average energy savings of 10.2x, 8.9x,
and 6.5x over the foremost GNN accelerators, i.e., FlowGNN,
LL-GNN, and ReGNN, respectively.
Index Terms—HyperGNN; redundancy-aware; accelerator;

TABLE I
A COMPARISON OF STATE - OF - THE - ART SOLUTIONS IN TERMS OF SUPPORT
FOR H YPER GNN
Solutions
HyperGef [54]
HAG [25]
FlowGNN [38]
ReGNN [13]
I-GCN [20]
RAHP

Hypergraph

!
%
%
%
%
!

Vertex aggregation
redundancy reduction

%
!
%
!
!
!

Hyperedge aggregation
redundancy reduction

%
%
%
%
%
!

I. I NTRODUCTION
Hypergraph neural networks (HyperGNNs) represent a
cutting-edge advancement in learning from data structured as
hypergraphs, extending the capabilities of traditional Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs). By taking hypergraphs as inputs,
HyperGNNs can learn the vertex representations through the
propagation of information along hyperedges. Their ability
to model high-order connectivity endows HyperGNNs with
superior power in capturing complex relationships and dependencies, setting them apart from conventional GNNs. This
enhanced modeling capability has enabled HyperGNNs to effectively tackle complex problems in various domains dealing
with multifaceted data, such as recommendation systems [30],
drug discovery [37], and VLSI congestion prediction [39].
Divergent from the computation paradigm of GNNs, HyperGNNs adhere to a unique computational sequence that
unfolds across four critical stages [9], [40]. As shown in
Figure 1 (b), in the Feature Projection (FP) stage, the intrinsic
vertex features (i.e., feature vectors) are transmuted into an
elevated feature space via a neural network transformation;
the Hyperedge Aggregation (HA) phase then aggregates these
transformed vertex features within each hyperedge to engender
hyperedge representations; the Vertex Aggregation (VA) stage
gathers messages from the interconnected hyperedge features,
resulting in the refinement of vertex features; and ultimately,
the Vertex Update (VU) stage employs an additional neural
network to synthesize the terminal vertex feature vectors. By
integrating this hyperedge-level aggregation alongside feature
transformation, HyperGNNs adeptly encapsulate the high-

