Over-synchronization in GPU Programs
Ajay Nayak

Arkaprava Basu

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India
ajaynayak@iisc.ac.in

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India
arkapravab@iisc.ac.in

Abstract—The performance of GPU (Graphics Processing
Unit)-accelerated functions affects a large spectrum of modern
software. Efficiently synchronizing across thousands of concurrent threads is critical to the performance of GPU programs.
GPU vendors have introduced advanced programming constructs, e.g., scopes, for efficiently synchronizing within a chosen
subset of threads. However, programmers must explicitly employ
them, where applicable, to benefit from such features.
We demonstrate how GPU programs can leave performance
on the table by failing to fully harness advanced synchronization
features in modern GPUs – leading to over-synchronization. We
discover three different variants of over-synchronization observed
in real-world applications. We then build a tool, ScopeAdvice, to
find cases of over-synchronization in CUDA programs. Avoiding reported over-synchronization improves the performance of
several GPU applications by up to 55%.
Index Terms—GPU, synchronization, performance bugs.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A broad class of today’s software, from deep learning, graph
processing, and data analytics to scientific computing, rely on
GPU’s massively parallel computing [1]–[3]. Consequently,
the efficiency of GPU programs has an overwhelming bearing
on the performance of a large swath of software.
GPUs significantly contribute to a server’s capital and
operational costs. We estimate that 87% of the cost of a DGX
server with four NVIDIA A100 GPUs is due to the GPUs
only [4], [5]. They contribute significantly to the power budget,
too [6]. Unfortunately, GPUs are often left under-utilized by
the software, significantly but unnecessarily increasing the cost
of computing [7]–[11].
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate
how sub-optimal synchronization in GPU programs can cause
significant performance inefficiency. Many key use cases of
GPU, e.g., graph processing, need fine-grain synchronization,
e.g., fences. The efficiency of synchronizing across thousands
of concurrent GPU threads can significantly affect a GPU
program’s overall performance. However, GPU’s hierarchical programming paradigm and its nuanced synchronization
model [12], [13] make writing correct GPU programs with
minimal synchronization challenging.
To keep thousands of concurrent GPU threads tractable,
they are organized as groups of up to 1024 threads called a
threadblock. Synchronizing across all the threads of a kernel
is slow and often unnecessary due to GPU’s hierarchical
programming paradigm. Programming languages like CUDA
and OpenCL support scoped synchronization to write efficiently synchronized code. The scope qualifiers guarantee

that the effect of the synchronization is visible only within
a subset of threads (i.e., its scope). Those with a narrower
scope that synchronizes a smaller subset of threads are faster.
For example, on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, the blockscope fence that guarantees visibility in the issuing thread’s
threadblock is 21× faster than the device-scope fence that
ensures visibility across all threads of a kernel.
The default scope in both CUDA and OpenCL is the
device scope. Programmers must explicitly use a narrower
scope (e.g., block), where applicable, for good performance.
However, a data race can manifest if the scope is narrower than
needed for synchronizing threads [14]–[16]. Unsurprisingly,
programmers often use a wider scope than necessary, prioritizing correctness over performance, even in popular CUDA
libraries written by experts (e.g., cuML [17]). A programmer
could have used a narrower-scoped operation to improve
performance without altering the program’s behavior. We call
such occurrences over-synchronization.
We discover three subtle variants of over-synchronization
and redundant synchronization in CUDA programs [18] that
may leave significant performance on the table. Their subtlety
arises from the interaction of CUDA’s scoped synchronization
model and the GPU micro-architecture.
First, we find that a fence can have a wider scope than
necessary due to the nuanced semantics of related memory
operations. Assume that a variable is written to (store) and read
from (load) by threads from different threadblocks. It is natural
to assume that synchronization (e.g., fence) of device scope
is needed after the write and before the read to ensure that
the latter observes data produced by the first thread. However,
we observe that a narrower-scoped fence will suffice if the
instruction performing the read skips the GPU’s L1 cache to
directly look up the GPU’s L2 cache.1 For example, a load
to a variable declared ‘volatile’ is guaranteed to skip the L1
cache and return the value from the coherent L2 cache or
memory (§14.5.3.3 of [18]). Similarly, the memory operations
in a device-scoped atomic read-modify-write instruction also
skip the L1 cache. In such scenarios, the fence is needed
only to ensure ordering amongst the loads/stores and not for
ensuring visibility of updates across threadblocks. As a fence
of any scope guarantees ordering, using a narrower-scoped
1 Unlike CPUs, GPU hardware, by design, eschews cache coherence for its
L1 caches to avoid overheads of maintaining coherence across thousands of
concurrent loads/stores. The L2 cache, however, is coherent.

fence, e.g., a block-scoped fence, before reading the variable,
would have preserved the program semantics (Section III-1).
In another incarnation of over-synchronization, a fence
could be entirely redundant. We notice that the threadblock
barrier in CUDA ( syncthreads) encompasses the semantics
of a block-scoped fence beyond acting as an execution barrier
across threads in a threadblock. Thus, using a block-scoped
fence immediately following a barrier is redundant. Finally, we
notice that common lock/unlock routines may unnecessarily
synchronize across all threads of a kernel, even when the
communicating threads fall within the same threadblock.
We find evidence of these variants of over-synchronizations
across popular GPU-accelerated libraries and open-source
programs, including cuML [17], cudpp [19], cuBLAS [20],
and gpufilter [21]. In each case, modifying only three lines
of code on average, i.e., either by changing a fence’s scope
or removing one, improves the performance by up to 55%
without affecting program behavior.
We demonstrate how removing these over-synchronizations
retains the original program’s semantics. NVIDIA publishes
only a programming optimization guide for CUDA but does
not formally specify its memory consistency model. However,
it formally specifies the memory model for PTX [22]. All
programs written in CUDA code are lowered to PTX. We
demonstrate that the removal of over-synchronizations is also
valid against the formal PTX memory consistency model.
Unfortunately, given the subtleties of these oversynchronizations, it could be challenging to manually notice
these, as evidenced by their existence in libraries written by
experts. Our final contribution thus is ScopeAdvice, a tool
that detects over-synchronization in CUDA programs. It uses
NVIDIA’s NVBit library [23] to trace a kernel’s execution
and gather relevant memory access and synchronization traces
for analysis. ScopeAdvice reports the line number, source
file, and the type of over-synchronization (if present). Given
concrete, actionable advice, the programmer can enhance
their code to improve performance.
Beyond its usefulness to existing programs, ScopeAdvice
eases programming too. Scoped synchronization significantly
burdens programmers [24], [25]. With ScopeAdvice, programmers can first focus on functional correctness while writing
new programs, possibly with over-synchronization, and then
use ScopeAdvice to find optimization opportunities.
Over-synchronizations will likely become more prevalent as
GPU vendors continue to introduce newer levels in the programming hierarchy and, thus, newer synchronization scopes.
For example, in Hopper GPUs, NVIDIA introduced a new
level in the hierarchy called a cluster, encompassing up to
eight threadblocks sharing a memory region (§2.2.1 of [18]).
The associated new synchronization scopes further increase
the possibility of introducing over-synchronizations.
In summary, we make the following contributions.
• We are the first to report sub-optimal performance of GPU
programs due to over-synchronization. We find three variants
of over-synchronization.

• We demonstrate that removing over-synchronization from
CUDA programs does not alter the program’s semantics.
• We built a runtime tool, ScopeAdvice, to detect and report
suspected cases of over-synchronization to the programmer.
Following the tool’s advice, programs sped up by up to 55%.
II. BACKGROUND
GPU hierarchy: GPUs arrange thousands of concurrent
threads in a hierarchy. The top of the hardware hierarchy
consists of Streaming Multiprocessors (SM). Each SM sports
multiple Single-Instruction-Multiple-Data (SIMD) units further divided into execution lanes. All SIMD units in an SM
share a private L1 cache and scratchpad (shared memory). All
the SMs share a larger L2 cache. The GPU’s global memory
(on-board device memory) is accessible to all GPU threads.
The hardware caches contents of global memory in L1 and
L2 caches. GPU hardware does not keep its L1 cache contents
coherent to avoid excessive overheads across hundreds of SMs.
However, L2 cache contents are always coherent.
In the software hierarchy, the smallest execution unit is
a thread mapped to an execution lane in a SIMD unit. A
group of threads (typically 32) forms a warp, the smallest
hardware-scheduled unit of work that executes on SIMD units.
A block (threadblock) is a group of warps that executes on the
same SM. Threads in a threadblock can communicate amongst
themselves via scratchpad. Finally, a grid comprises all the
threadblocks used for executing a GPU kernel.
Scoped Operations on GPUs: Global synchronization across
all the threads on a GPU is often unnecessary. Since the
execution is naturally divided into threadblocks, synchronization within a threadblock is often sufficient. NVIDIA, AMD
provides a programming construct called scopes that enables
specifying the subset of the threads that should synchronize.
CUDA supports scope qualifiers for fence and atomic operations. Fences in CUDA provide both ordering and visibility
guarantees. A fence of any scope ensures that memory instructions in the issuing thread cannot be reordered across the
fence. The scope qualifier of the fence ensures the visibility
of operations across a subset of threads. For example, a blockscoped fence ( threadfence block) guarantees that all writes
by the issuing thread are made visible to all the threads in its
threadblock. In contrast, a device-scoped fence ( threadfence,
default) must ensure that the writes before it are visible across
all the threadblocks. This requires flushing dirty cache lines
from the private, incoherent L1 cache to the coherent L2. The
device scope must ensure that the reads after the fence get
the data from the L2 cache, which requires invalidating the
L1 cache contents. In comparison, a block-scoped fence must
ensure visibility only within a threadblock. It does not require
flushing or invalidating L1 cache contents since all threads
in a threadblock share the same L1 cache. The system scope
ensures visibility across all GPUs (multi-GPU system) and
CPU threads. We focus on execution on a single GPU and,
thus, limit our discussion on block and device scopes.
Atomic read-modify-write (RMW) instructions can also be
qualified with scopes. Block-scoped atomics ensure visibility

