arXiv:2409.12432v2 [quant-ph] 26 Sep 2024

Qoncord: A Multi-Device Job Scheduling
Framework for Variational Quantum Algorithms
Meng Wang

Poulami Das

Prashant J. Nair

ECE Department
The University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
mengwang@ece.ubc.ca

ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA
poulami.das@utexas.edu

ECE Department
The University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
prashantnair@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract—Quantum computers face challenges due to limited
resources, particularly in cloud environments. Despite these obstacles, Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) are considered
promising applications for present-day Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) systems. VQAs require multiple optimization
iterations to converge on a globally optimal solution. Moreover,
these optimizations, known as restarts, need to be repeated from
different points to mitigate the impact of noise. Unfortunately,
the job scheduling policies for each VQA task in the cloud are
heavily unoptimized. Notably, each VQA execution instance is
typically scheduled on a single NISQ device. Given the variety of
devices in the cloud, users often prefer higher-fidelity devices to
ensure higher-quality solutions. However, this preference leads to
increased queueing delays and unbalanced resource utilization.
We propose Qoncord, an automated job scheduling framework
to address these cloud-centric challenges for VQAs. Qoncord
leverages the insight that not all training iterations and restarts
are equal, Qoncord strategically divides the training process into
exploratory and fine-tuning phases. Early exploratory iterations,
more resilient to noise, are executed on less busy machines,
while fine-tuning occurs on high-fidelity machines. This adaptive
approach mitigates the impact of noise, optimizes resource usage,
and reduces queuing delays in cloud environments. Qoncord also
significantly reduces execution time and minimizes restart overheads by eliminating low-performance iterations. Thus, Qoncord
offers similar solutions 17.4× faster. It also provides 13.3% better
solutions for the same time budget as the baseline.
Keywords—Quantum Computing, Cloud Environment, Variational Quantum Algorithm

I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum computers hold the promise of transformative
computational capabilities [1]–[4]. While quantum computers with a few hundred qubits are accessible through cloud
services from IBM, Amazon, and Microsoft [5]–[8], their
potential is hindered by the inherent hardware noise and
scarcity of resources. Near-term Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) systems [9] lack the redundancies necessary
for fault tolerance [10]. Nevertheless, NISQ devices promise
to accelerate many crucial domain-specific applications using
Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) [4], [11], [12]. These
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

algorithms map the problems onto parametric quantum circuits and iteratively train circuit parameters with a classical
optimizer. However, the performance of VQAs is significantly
constrained by noise and prolonged device access times.
Program execution on NISQ devices significantly affects the
training process of VQAs. For instance, noisy executions can
necessitate increased iterations due to a lack of gradients or,
in the worst case, not converging to the optimal parameters.
The optimization process often gets trapped in local optima,
prompting the need for multiple random restarts [13], [14].
In these restarts, end-to-end optimization is repeated from a
different starting point, and the best result is ultimately selected. Consequently, hardware noise causes the total number
of circuit executions required for VQAs to surge compared to
an idealized noise-free setting [15]–[17].
These problems are exacerbated by (1) the limited availability of quantum computers in the cloud and (2) devicelevel variations leading to divergent error profiles. Globally,
nearly a dozen quantum cloud services provide access to fewer
than fifty quantum systems [5]–[7], [18]–[22]. These scarce
resources are shared among thousands of users, resulting in
significant queueing delays. This bottleneck is pronounced
for VQAs, which execute circuits sequentially, with hundreds
of computational jobs often awaiting execution on a single
device [23]. Additionally, quantum computers vary in size and
error rates. For instance, IBM Quantum systems range from
27 to 127 qubits, with 2-qubit gate error rates varying by 7×
(from 0.3% to 2.1%) [5]. This leads to unbalanced loads as
users and cloud providers naturally select the highest fidelity
devices, further complicating resource allocation.
Presently, three approaches exist to mitigate cloud latencies.
Firstly, IBM’s Runtime allows dedicated device access to
users [24]. Users can specify a device, or the cloud provider
defaults to the least busy device based on the load [25].
Secondly, Ravi et al. suggest prioritizing a high-fidelity device with a low load and opting for a low-fidelity device
otherwise [23]. However, this approach may select low-fidelity
devices during periods of high load, potentially compromising
solution quality and training performance. Thirdly, Stein et
al. propose a framework mainly applicable to a class of
VQAs for chemistry applications [26] that require many
circuit executions per iteration. The framework distributes the

High-Fidelity
Device

R1

R2

Low-Fidelity
Device

R3

Rn Restart #n

High-Fidelity
Device
Low-Fidelity
Device

(a) Baseline

R1 E

R1 F

R2 F

R2 E

R3 E

E

Exploration

Switch

F

Fine-tune

Termination

(b) Qoncord

Fig. 1. In the baseline approach (Figure (a)), all VQA iterations for each restart are executed on a single device. Despite queueing delays, ibmq kolkata
outperforms ibmq toronto by 159%, even with 3× more pending jobs (with longer actual wait times). On the other hand, Qoncord (Figure (b)) starts exploratory
iterations on the low-load (LL) device, ibmq toronto, before shifting to the high-fidelity ibmq kolkata for fine-tuning. This dynamic scheduling leads to 2.14×
faster performance. Additionally, Qoncord efficiently evaluates restart quality on the low-load device, promptly terminating low-quality restarts.

High-Load device for performance-critical fine-tuning. As
shown in Figure 1(b), this transition occurs if the optimization
metric remains unchanged over a specified number (threshold)
of iterations on the Low-Fidelity Low-Load device. Qoncord
achieves fidelity comparable to High-Fidelity-only access in
less time by using this scheduling approach.

executions across multiple devices (with high and low loads) to
accelerate gradient estimation in each iteration. However, all
these scheduling policies use the same device(s) throughout
the training, as shown in Figure 1(a). Thus, their performance
is limited by either the noise of the lowest-fidelity device or
the wait times of the highest-load device.
Enhancing the performance of VQAs is challenging due
to conflicting objectives; devices with Low-Fidelity typically
exhibit Low-Load, whereas High-Fidelity devices often experience High-Load. Figure 1(a) shows the training steps of a
VQA on a noisy simulator using the error model of two 27qubit IBMQ devices1 . We observe that utilizing Low-Fidelity
Low-Load devices reduces execution time but compromises
accuracy. The ibmq kolkata device, with higher fidelity than
the ibmq toronto device, achieves a 159% improvement in
optimization performance; however, it also encounters prolonged queueing delays, which results in extended execution
times. This paper aims to improve throughput (using LowFidelity Low-Load devices) without compromising solution
quality (using High-Fidelity High-Load devices).
This paper introduces Qoncord, an automated job scheduling framework tailored to overcome the above challenges for
quantum clouds. Qoncord leverages two insights:
1. Not all Training Steps are Equal: Qoncord is built on
the insight that not all VQA training steps contribute equally
to the optimization process. It leverages this understanding to
recommend that different training steps need not execute on
the same quantum device. Thus, Qoncord divides the training
process into distinct stages. During the initial exploration
stage, the optimization routine explores a broad parameter
region to identify potential areas containing the optima. The
subsequent fine-tuning stage involves precisely adjusting the
parameter settings to converge to the optimal solution.
Our results, shown in Section IV-B, reveal that the exploration stage is more resilient to noise than the fine-tuning
stage. Thus, Qoncord directs the exploration to a Low-Fidelity
Low-Load device and dynamically switches to a High-Fidelity

2. Not all Restarts are Equal: Qoncord leverages the insight
that not all restarts are equal, and therefore, not all of them
have to go through the end-to-end optimization routine. As
illustrated in Figure 1(b), Qoncord quickly evaluates the early
exploration steps of each restart on the Low-Fidelity LowLoad device, terminates poor candidates, and fine-tunes the
remaining candidates on the High-Fidelity High-Load device.
By doing so, the effective throughput of the VQA execution
is improved even further. Although Figure 1(b) only illustrates
the splitting of the execution into two phases on two devices,
Qoncord can be generalized to split the execution into a larger
number of phases and then run them on a fleet of NISQ devices
with varying fidelities.
To that end, this paper makes four key contributions:
1) We quantitatively demonstrate that high-fidelity quantum
devices experience higher loads than other devices.
2) We show that running all VQA iterations on the same
device suffers from poor accuracy or high execution time.
3) We propose Qoncord, an automated software framework
that splits VQA training into phases and adaptively schedules
them across multiple devices.
4) Qoncord reduces the overheads of restarts during VQA
training by adaptively terminating poor candidates.
5) Qoncord provides incentives for device vendors to release
non-optimal devices by demonstrating their effective utilization. Thus, it enables cloud service providers to maximize
resource utility and reduce queuing delays.
Our evaluations using the error models of IBMQ quantum
devices show that Qoncord offers (1) similar solution quality
for VQAs 17.4× faster and (2) provides 13.3% times better
solution quality within the same training time.

1 It is noteworthy that even with dedicated access to ibmq kolkata, users
are constrained by access times, especially if numerous users request access.

2

