2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)

2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) | 979-8-3503-5057-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00024

A Framework for Fine-Grained Program Versioning
Yishen Chen

Saman Amarasinghe

MIT CSAIL
ychen306@mit.edu

MIT CSAIL
saman@csail.mit.edu

Loop Versioning. When there is insufficient dependence
information, production compilers use a technique called loop
versioning. With loop versioning, the optimizer makes two
copies of a loop—one loop is optimized, assuming there are
no dependencies among instructions that are critical to the
optimization, and the other is left unoptimized—and generates
run-time checks so that the optimized loop is only entered if
the absence of these dependencies is confirmed. Because the
run-time checks must be performed upfront before the loop
is executed, loop versioning only works if all the requisite
information is known before the loop is executed.

Abstract—Static dependence analysis is critical for optimizations such as vectorization and loop-invariant code motion.
However, traditional static dependence analysis is often imprecise,
making these optimizations less effective. To address this issue,
production compilers use loop versioning to rule out some
categories of memory dependencies at run time. However, loop
versioning is loop-centric and usually tied to specific optimizations (e.g., loop vectorization), making it less effective for nonloop optimizations such as superword-level parallelism (SLP)
vectorization.
In this paper, we propose a fine-grained versioning framework
to rule out program dependencies at run time. Our framework is
general and not tailored to any specific optimizations. To use our
system, a client optimization specifies groups of instructions (or
loops) whose independence is desired but unprovable statically.
In response, our system duplicates the appropriate instructions
and guards the original ones with run-time checks to guarantee
their independence; if the checks fail, the duplicated instructions
execute instead.
In a case study, we extended an existing SLP vectorizer with
minimal modifications using our framework, resulting in a 1.17×
speedup over Clang’s vectorizers on TSVC and a 1.51× speedup
on PolyBench. In both benchmarks, we encountered programs
that could not be vectorized with loop versioning alone.
In a second case study, we used our framework to implement
a more aggressive variant of redundant load elimination than
the one implemented by Clang. Our redundant load elimination
results in a 1.012× speedup on the SPEC 2017 Floating Point
benchmarks, with the maximum speedup being 1.064×.

Consequently, loop versioning cannot rule out dependencies
that are loop-variant. For instance, complex pointer arithmetic
can lead to some memory accesses that are dependent in some
iterations yet independent in others. Similarly, loop versioning
cannot rule out rare dependencies that are caused by conditionally executed instructions within the loop. To deal with such
dependencies in the context of vectorization, researchers have
proposed an approach that performs sophisticated run-time
checks that are more fine-grained [10, 17]. In this approach,
the vectorizer first identifies some specific control-flow paths
along which the loop iterations are completely independent.
It then optimizes the program assuming only those paths are
taken, while also generating the necessary recovery code in
case the paths are not taken. Unlike loop versioning, this
approach is tied specifically to vectorization and only works
in the presence of loops that follow certain patterns.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Dependence analysis is crucial for many compiler transformations, such as loop-invariant code motion, vectorization,
and, more generally, any optimizations that perform code
motion. However, performing precise dependence analysis is
difficult. For example, in a language such as C, the compiler
must assume that arbitrary pointer arguments may alias and
that all memory accesses on those pointers are dependent. This
scenario can be addressed, to some degree, with interprocedural pointer analyses. However, such analyses are prohibitively
expensive and not deployed in production compilers. Furthermore, dependence analysis is complicated by nontrivial pointer
arithmetic and control flow, both of which can induce patterns
that are impossible to analyze soundly at compile time, even
with state-of-the-art analysis. For example, two indirect pointer
accesses could be both dependent and independent, depending
on how the input is initialized. All these factors contribute
to imprecise dependence analysis, making optimizations less
effective as a consequence.

979-8-3503-5057-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00024

Our Approach. In this paper, we propose a fine-grained
versioning framework to rule out program dependencies at run
time. Our framework is general, flexible, and not coupled with
specific optimizations. To use our system, a client optimization
supplies groups of instructions (or loops) whose independence
is desired but cannot be proven statically. In response, our
system identifies a small—and in many cases optimal—set of
conditions that ensures the independence of those instructions
and then versions the input program accordingly.
Our framework is fine-grained because it develops a versioning strategy for each group of instructions (or loops) individually, without having to version whole loops at a time. This
is particularly useful when some dependence relationships
change from loop iteration to iteration due to nontrivial uses
of pointer arithmetic. Furthermore, our framework supports

201

Authorized licensed use limited to: MIT. Downloaded on May 09,2025 at 10:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nested versioning, which is necessary when one versioning
transformation itself relies on assumptions that cannot be
statically proven, thus requiring a further round of versioning
to confirm those assumptions at run time.

Y[0] = 0;
if (*X) cold_func();
Y[1] = 0;

Fig. 1: Running example. The highlighted instructions may be
dependent and cannot be directly vectorized.

Central to our framework is the concept of dependence condition, which identifies the necessary condition under which a
dependence occurs at run time. While most dependencies are
unconditional—such as when arithmetic instructions depend
on their operands unconditionally—others are conditional. For
example, a pair of memory accesses is only dependent if the
accessed memory locations overlap; a load only depends on a
preceding conditional store if the store actually executes at run
time. Our insight is that when dealing with instructions whose
independence cannot be statically proven due to conditional
dependencies, we can establish a sufficient condition for their
independence by finding a cut over the dependence graph that
makes the instructions unreachable from one another. This cut
reveals the conditional dependencies that we must check at
run time.

noalias = X != Y;
if (noalias) {
x = *X;
if (x) Y[0] = 0;
else {
Y[0] = 0;
Y[1] = 0;
}
} else {
Y[0] = 0;
x = *X;
}
if (x) cold_func();
if (!noalias || x) Y[1] = 0;

Fig. 2: Running example transformed so that the stores become
independent (and amenable to vectorization).
This paper makes the following contributions:
• A general, fine-grained versioning framework.
• The concept of nested versioning, where the run-time
checks of a versioning transformation require further
versioning.
• The concept of dependence condition, which allows us
to systematically identify dependencies that can be eliminated at run time.
• Empirical evaluations showing that our framework enables an existing SLP vectorizer to effectively vectorize
programs in the presence of conditional dependencies.
• Empirical evaluation showing that our framework enables
a more effective form of redundant load elimination.

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, we
first applied our versioning framework to an existing implementation of superword-level parallelism (SLP) vectorization.
Although most production loop vectorizers—such as those
employed by GCC and Clang—use loop versioning, there
has been no implementation of SLP vectorization capable of
versioning because it is more flexible and not loop-centric.
Consequently, SLP vectorization has been limited by pointer
aliasing and other sources program dependencies, particularly
when compared to loop vectorization.
We adapted Chen et al.’s [4] SLP vectorizer—an aggressive
SLP implementation that can pack independent instructions
globally across loops and basic blocks—to use our versioning framework. With versioning, this single implementation
of SLP is 1.17× faster than both LLVM’s loop and SLP
vectorizers combined on the TSVC benchmark (and 1.07×
faster than their previous implementation). On PolyBench with
the restrict keyword disabled, versioning enabled a 1.51×
speedup over both LLVM’s vectorizers (and 1.62× faster than
their previous implementation). In both benchmark suites,
we found examples of programs that cannot be vectorized
with loop versioning alone. We obtained these results without
changing any of the vectorizer’s heuristic or code-generation
algorithms: we only modified the vectorizer to inform our
framework of the groups of instructions that should be independent, and it versions the program transparently.

II. RUNNING E XAMPLE
Figure 1 shows a snippet of a C function that will serve
as a running example throughout the paper. Suppose we want
to optimize the program by replacing the stores to the array
Y with a single vector store. This is only possible if the two
stores are independent; however, any sound static dependence
analysis will conclude that the stores are dependent for the
following reasons. First, there is a dependence chain from the
last store (Y[1] = 0) to the load (*X) because the pointers
X and Y may alias, and then to the first store (Y[0] = 0).
Second, the function call also prevents vectorization because
it may read and write arbitrary memory.
Figure 2 shows a program equivalent to the running example. We can verify that the programs are equivalent with
a case analysis of the two if conditions and the resulting
traces of operations. Although the two programs have the
same semantics, there is one key difference, namely that in the
rewritten program, the stores we are interested in are independent. Section III discusses how our framework automatically
performs this transformation for general programs to ensure
that the specified sets of instructions are independent.

Finally, we used our framework to implement a variant
of redundant load elimination that removes redundant loads
that cannot be proven redundant with traditional static analysis. With versioning, our implementation of redundant load
elimination achieves a geometric mean speedup of 1.2% on
the SPEC 2017 Floating Point benchmark suite, with the
maximum speedup being 6.4%.

202
Authorized licensed use limited to: MIT. Downloaded on May 09,2025 at 10:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

