SUV: Static analysis guided Unified Virtual Memory
Pratheek B

Guilherme Cox

Jan Vesely

Arkaprava Basu

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India
pratheekb@iisc.ac.in

NVIDIA
Santa Clara, USA
gcox@nvidia.com

NVIDIA
Westford, USA
jvesely@nvidia.com

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India
arkapravab@iisc.ac.in

Abstract—Unified Virtual Memory (UVM) eases GPU programming and enables oversubscription of the limited GPU
memory capacity. Unfortunately, UVM may cause significant
slowdowns due to thrashing of the GPU memory and overheads
of page faults, especially under memory oversubscription.
We propose to leverage high-level memory access patterns
of CUDA applications to reduce the overheads of UVM. We
create SUV, a hybrid framework that leverages compiler-inferred
(static analysis) memory access semantics to make proactive
memory management decisions where possible and selectively
leverages runtime page migrations where needed. It can pin data
structures entirely or partially on the GPU memory or CPU’s
DRAM based on their inferred usefulness and automatically issue
software prefetches at kernel boundaries. It also selectively lets
parts of data structures migrate on demand onto reserved HBM
capacity at runtime. SUV reduces execution times of a variety of
applications by 74% over UVM under memory oversubscription.
Index Terms—GPGPU, UVM, static-analysis, access-counters

I. I NTRODUCTION
A significant fraction of today’s data-intensive computing
happens on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). While the
need to quickly process ever larger amounts of data remains
unabated, GPU’s onboard high-bandwidth memory (HBM 1 )
remains capacity-limited. Toward this, technologies such as
NVIDIA’s Unified Virtual Memory (UVM), originally envisioned to ease programming, enable oversubscribing HBM by
leveraging TBs of DRAM capacity of the host CPU.
UVM can, however, incur large slowdowns under memory
oversubscription due to overheads of on-demand page migration. It may thrash the HBM by repeatedly migrating pages
back and forth between the HBM and the DRAM as it reacts to
runtime memory access streams without semantic knowledge.
Prior works focused on runtime hardware and/or software optimizations to limit UVM’s overheads. Most prominent among them include prefetching techniques [1]–[4], and
batching of GPU page faults to amortize overheads [5]–[7].
NVIDIA also introduced access counter-based migration to
avoid page faults in the critical path [8]. However, they all
fail to leverage higher-level memory access patterns of CUDA
applications and instead remain myopic to limited runtime
information. They also remain susceptible to thrashing under
memory oversubscription in the absence of semantic insights
into memory access patterns across phases of computing.
1 For brevity, we henceforth refer to GPU’s onboard memory as HBM
without loss of generality. It can be GDDR or HBM2/3 technology.

Different from the runtime-only optimizations, we propose
Static analysis guided UVM (SUV) to harness higher-level
access patterns and semantics of CUDA programs. SUV’s
objective is to maximize the utilization of capacity-limited
HBM while minimizing thrashing and page fault overheads.
Towards these goals, SUV employs a hybrid framework
that couples high-level memory access semantics, statically
inferred by a compiler, with selective runtime optimizations.
Specifically, SUV embodies four key innovations.
First, it places and pins data structures with high access
density onto the capacity-limited HBM. Data structures with
relatively low access density are placed on the DRAM. The
access density of a given data structure is the number of GPU
memory accesses to it, divided by its size. This helps maximize
accesses to the HBM while limiting those to the DRAM over
the slow PCIe and avoiding page faults. SUV’s compiler pass
analyzes access patterns to different data structures to estimate
the number of GPU memory accesses a data structure may
witness. SUV combines it with runtime information of sizes
of data structures to calculate access densities.
Second, we make a key observation that kernels often access
different parts of large data structures during different phases
of a kernel’s execution. This is common for kernels computing
on large matrices. A kernel could be launched with hundreds
of thousands of threads, but a GPU may be able to execute
only a subset of those threads simultaneously. Thus, only a
fraction of such data structures are accessed depending upon
the set of threads executing at a given computing phase (time).
To avoid wasting precious HBM capacity, SUV selectively
retains only portions of such data structures in the HBM
through a hybrid of compiler-inferred memory access patterns
and runtime page migration. Specifically, it uses static analysis
to infer the relation between threads and the parts of a data
structure(s) it accesses. It combines this with the runtime information of the number of threads the given GPU can execute
simultaneously to find the fraction of a data structure(s) that
would be accessed concurrently (a.k.a., working set). SUV
then reserves HBM capacity to retain only the working set
and allow portions of the data structure to migrate onto the
reserved HBM capacity on demand. This avoids thrashing of
other data structures, besides improving HBM utilization by
retaining only the working set.
Third, we also notice that CUDA applications often iteratively launch kernels to process large datasets where the
kernels compute on disjoint portions of the dataset in different

iterations (invocations). Our static analysis infers the relation
between a loop induction variable and the portions of the
dataset that kernels would access in a given iteration. SUV
then injects CPU code to explicitly (software) prefetch the data
that will be accessed in an upcoming iteration (s) onto HBM
while evicting those accessed in a previous iteration (s). This
limits page faults while retaining useful data on the HBM.
Finally, not all access patterns are amenable to static
analysis, e.g., pointer-chase. SUV’s static analysis identifies
them. It then deploys a hybrid approach where only such data
structures are selectively migrated onto a reserved portion of
HBM leveraging hardware access counters.
SUV requires no programmer intervention, no new hardware, nor does it need profiling. Its implementation has four
major components. A compiler pass built into the LLVM
framework [9] analyzes the memory access patterns of CUDA
kernels. A second compiler pass analyzes the application’s
CPU (host) code for identifying variables that hold key
execution-specific information, e.g., the sizes of data structures
and the number of threads. It then injects CPU code to
compute various metrics, e.g., access densities, during the
program’s execution. It does so by combining the results of
static analysis with execution-specific information. SUV then
invokes appropriate routines implementing memory management policies. The third component is a user-space library
implementing and enforcing memory management policies via
an enhanced UVM driver. The final component is an extended
UVM driver in Linux that helps enforce memory management
decisions [10]. The driver supports new capabilities to enable
SUV’s hybrid strategy, e.g., enabling access-counter-based
page migration only for chosen virtual address ranges.
SUV’s implementation consists of ∼3000 LOC in the
LLVM compiler framework, ∼200 LOC for implementing
memory management policies and ∼150 LOC for enhancing
the UVM’s Linux driver. The source code for SUV is available
at https://github.com/csl-iisc/SUV-MICRO24.
SUV reduces the execution time of a variety of applications
by 45% to 76% on average, over UVM with tree-based
prefetching, under various oversubscription levels [11], [12].
We quantitatively compared SUV against hardware accesscounter-based page migration [13] and a closely related academic work [14] to find that SUV significantly outperforms
them across the board.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, SUV is the first to harness
static (compiler) analysis to enable low-overhead UVM for
CUDA applications.
• We propose SUV, a novel hybrid framework that judiciously
leverages both compiler-inferred high-level memory access
patterns of CUDA applications and selective runtime page
migration for chosen memory regions.
• We make multiple key observations.We observe that different parts of a data structure can be accessed at different phases
of computing based on the sub-set of GPU threads executing
at a given time. We also observe that different iterations can
access different parts of a data structure in applications that

iteratively launch kernels.
• We build SUV in software by enhancing the compiler,
the runtime, and the UVM driver. It requires no programmer
intervention or hardware modifications.
• SUV reduces the execution time of applications by 45-74%,
on average, without profiling or programmer intervention.
II. BACKGROUND
GPUs are designed to accelerate data-parallel processing.
The compute functions that run on GPU, called kernels, are
typically written in CUDA for NVIDIA GPUs [15] 2 . The CPU
code launches a kernel with a grid many thousands of threads.
The grid is partitioned into equal-sized threadblocks (TBs)
comprising up to 1024 threads each. A TB typically contains
multiple warps, each with 32 threads that execute in the Single
Instruction Multiple Thread model. Each TB executes entirely
on a single Symmetric Multiprocessor (SM) on the GPU.
TBs in a grid and threads in a TB are arranged in a threedimensional space. Each TB in a grid is uniquely identifiable through indices along each axis (bid.x, bid.y, and
bid.z). Similarly, each thread in a TB can be uniquely
identified by indices along each axis (tid.x, tid.y, and
tid.z). GPU kernels typically use these identifiers to index
into data structures (e.g., a matrix). Kernels are often launched
with hundreds of thousands of threads, all of which may not
execute concurrently due to hardware resource constraints. The
hardware scheduler concurrently executes subsets of TBs that
it can accommodate at a time.
A. Unified Virtual Memory (UVM)
A GPU supports massive memory access bandwidth using
onboard High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) [16] or GDDR
technology [17]. We generally refer to GPU’s onboard memory
as HBM for brevity but without loss of generality. By default,
the programmer is responsible for allocating and copying
necessary data onto HBM. NVIDIA introduced UVM to
simplify memory management [18]. Memory allocated using
its cudaMallocManaged API is automatically migrated
between the DRAM (CPU memory) and HBM on demand.
Importantly, UVM enables oversubscribing HBM capacity. In
the cloud, oversubscribing the limited HBM capacity is key to
packing multiple clients onto one GPU.
Page fault-based migration: By default, NVIDIA enables
UVM through GPU page faults. A page fault is raised when
the GPU accesses a page that is not resident on HBM. The
UVM driver on the host CPU is notified of the fault. The driver
identifies and migrates the faulting page from the DRAM to
HBM. After the driver notifies the GPU of the completion of
the fault, the GPU re-executes the faulting instruction.
Tree-based prefetching: A GPU page fault and page migration incur tens of microseconds of delay [6]. To avoid
overheads in the critical path, researchers have explored
prefetching of pages onto HBM [1], [2], [7]. Most prominent
is the Tree-based prefetching (TBP) [11], [12]. TBP creates
2 We focus on NVIDIA GPUs, but ideas are generally applicable.

