T RINITY: A Fast Compressed Multi-attribute Data Store
Ziming Mao*

Kiran Srinivasan

Anurag Khandelwal

UC Berkeley

NetApp

Yale

Abstract
With the proliferation of attribute-rich machine-generated
data, emerging real-time monitoring, diagnosis, and visualization tools ingest and analyze such data across multiple
attributes simultaneously. Due to the sheer volume of the
data, applications need storage-efficient and performant data
representations to analyze them efficiently.
We present T RINITY, a system that simultaneously facilitates query and storage efficiency across large volumes of
multi-attribute records. T RINITY accomplishes this through
a new dynamic, succinct, multi-dimensional data structure,
M D T RIE. M D T RIE employs a combination of novel Morton code generalization, a multi-attribute query algorithm,
and a self-indexed trie structure to achieve the above goals.
Our evaluation of T RINITY for real-world use-cases shows
that compared to state-of-the-art systems, it supports (1)
7.2–59.6× faster multi-attribute searches, (2) storage footprint comparable to OLAP columnar stores and 4.8–15.1×
lower than NoSQL stores and OLTP databases, and (3) point
query throughput comparable to NoSQL stores and 1.7–52.5×
higher than OLTP databases and OLAP columnar stores.
ACM Reference Format:
Ziming Mao, Kiran Srinivasan, and Anurag Khandelwal. 2024.
T RINITY: A Fast Compressed Multi-attribute Data Store. In Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’24),
April 22–25, 2024, Athens, Greece. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627703.3650072

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the proliferation of attributerich data generated from automated sources, or “machinegenerated data” [1]. IoT devices already stream as many as
1.4 million data points per second per backing server [2–5].
Facebook’s monitoring systems used for operational metrics
like CPU, memory, and disk utilization generate around 12
* Work done while at Yale.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or
to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
EuroSys ’24, April 22–25, 2024, Athens, Greece
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0437-6/24/04

https://doi.org/10.1145/3627703.3650072

million data points per second per server [6–9]; and network
traffic logs for 100Gbps links can generate as many as 160 million data points per second at each server [10–12]. Such data
is a rich source of information, offering utility to a wide range
of monitoring, analysis, and visualization applications. However, the timeliness of such analysis is crucial; the value of
the analysis is often highest shortly after the data is ingested,
making the ability to query massive volumes of attribute-rich
data in near real-time of paramount importance.
As a concrete example, consider a taxi service that collects information about rides made in a busy city like New
York [13–16]. A subset of metadata recorded for each ride
includes pickup and drop-off locations, times, trip durations,
and fares. With up to 30 million rides per day [17], careful
time-sensitive planning of car availability and fare pricing is
required, particularly in locations with high demand. For instance, Uber accumulates hundreds of petabytes of analytical
data for forecasting rider demand and addressing driver-client
matching, with target data latency on the scale of minutes [14].
Facilitating this demands complex spatiotemporal analysis
of the ride data along multiple attributes simultaneously, e.g.,
tracking the number of trips with pickup and drop-off locations at popular locations at regular time intervals.
The unique characteristics of analyzing machine-generated
data impose challenging requirements on the underlying data
stores. On one hand, these systems should support low-latency,
high-throughput queries across attribute-rich data records.
These queries can be quite diverse; point queries involve fast
record insertions and lookups using a unique primary attribute,
while more complex analyses require simultaneous searches
across multiple secondary attributes. On the other hand, supporting performant analysis over massive data scales requires
holding large volumes of data in memory, making minimizing
the storage overheads crucial.
Unfortunately, existing systems compromise on one or
both of these requirements. Systems that support efficient
query semantics across multi-attribute records leverage additional multi-attribute index structures with large storage
overheads [18–24]. While such systems perform well for
small datasets, they cannot scale to larger datasets as the underlying data structure easily outgrows the memory capacity
— e.g., indexes alone can consume 55% of the total memory
in real-world in-memory databases [25]. Another emerging
class of systems leverages queries on compressed in-memory
data structures [26–29] to scale to larger datasets. However,
they do so by compromising functionality, e.g., they lack support for either efficient point queries [29, 30], fine-grained
in-place updates [26–28], or multi-attribute queries [26–29].

EuroSys ’24, April 22–25, 2024, Athens, Greece

Maintaining multiple secondary indexes in addition to the
compressed data can support the missing functionality but
incurs additional storage overheads, which ultimately limits
performance scalability (§2).
We present T RINITY, an in-memory data store that simultaneously supports fast point queries and multi-attribute range
searches on a storage-efficient data representation. To achieve
this, T RINITY argues for a fundamentally new approach to
multi-attribute data representation. This is motivated by our
observation that with the drastic growth in machine-generated
data, it is increasingly infeasible to store and analyze data in
memory, even in its native form, let alone with additional indexes for real-time analysis. As such, unlike prior approaches,
T RINITY natively supports rich queries on a dynamic succinct1 data structure, M D T RIE, with no additional indexes.
M D T RIE encodes different attributes of a record using a
space-filling curve [32] — specifically, a novel generalized
form of Morton code [33] — and stores them succinctly in a
trie.
Moreover, M D T RIE is self-indexed: our indexes are not
separate data structures, but instead embedded within the
same succinct trie that encodes the data. This approach effectively allows us to perform multi-attribute queries directly on
a compressed data representation. We also present several optimizations that exploit the structure of data representation in
M D T RIE, making it far more performant and space-efficient
than prior multi-attribute indexes (§5).
We incorporate M D T RIE into T RINITY, a distributed, faulttolerant data store (§4). We evaluate T RINITY for three realworld use-cases; compared to state-of-the-art systems, T RIN ITY supports (1) 7.2–59.6× faster multi-attribute searches,
(2) storage footprint comparable to columnar stores, and 4.8–
15.1× lower than NoSQL and OLTP databases, and (3) point
query throughput comparable to NoSQL stores and 1.7–52.5×
higher than OLTP databases and columnar stores (§5).
In summary, this paper makes three main contributions:
• Design of M D T RIE, a dynamic, succinct, self-indexed
multi-dimensional data structure that supports multi-attribute
range searches as well as efficient point queries.
• Design and implementation of T RINITY, a distributed data
store that leverages M D T RIE to store and query massive
multi-attribute datasets using a data-parallel architecture.
• Evaluation of M D T RIE and T RINITY against state-of-theart data structures and data stores on real-world workloads.
We note that our data representation makes some trade-offs
to achieve storage and query efficiency; specifically, T RIN ITY ’s Morton code-based representation requires queried attributes to have fixed bit-width representations. Fortunately,
this is acceptable for our target applications for machinegenerated data since they tend to work mainly with fixedwidth attributes (§5). Extending our representation to support
1 Formally, if the information-theoretic lower bound of a given dataset is 𝑛

bits, then a succinct data structure can represent it in 𝑛 + 𝑜 (𝑛) bits [31].

Ziming Mao, Kiran Srinivasan, and Anurag Khandelwal

variable-length attributes is an exciting future work (§6). The
code for T RINITY and the datasets and workloads used in our
evaluation are available at https://github.com/Trinitydata-store/Trinity.

2

Background and Motivation

This section describes the need for storing and analyzing
multi-attribute data (§2.1), the shortcomings of existing techniques in meeting this need (§2.2), and the approach that
T RINITY employs to overcome these shortcomings (§2.3).
2.1

Multi-Attribute Data Storage

Machine-generated data is typically composed of a collection
of structured records, with the records themselves composed
of multiple well-defined attributes. One of these attributes is
a unique identifier for the record — the primary key — while
the remaining attributes are secondary. This data is often
stored in NoSQL stores [34–37] or in-memory databases [38–
41], which use the primary key to support point queries
like lookups, insertions, and removals (via get(), put(), and
delete() operations, respectively). Secondary attributes, on
the other hand, are employed to support range and filter
queries, e.g., isolating all the events that may have occurred
in a specific time window for an IoT application. Increasingly, applications that use such data for monitoring, analysis,
and visualization require querying multiple attributes simultaneously, e.g., spatiotemporal queries on vehicular data for
real-time traffic applications (§1).
We identify three key requirements for storage systems
imposed by applications operating on multi-attribute data:
• Support for low-latency multi-attribute queries (on the
order of hundreds of milliseconds [42–45]) to enable rich
monitoring, analysis, and visualization queries. For instance, §5 outlines three emerging use cases where multiattribute queries are crucial to different applications.
• Space-efficient representation of data — ideally comparable to or lower than the original dataset size — to
maximize the amount of data that can be stored in memory
for low-latency queries at scale [26–29].
• Support for high-throughput point queries, i.e., record
lookups, insertions, and removals based on their primary
keys (on the order of thousands of operations per second per
core [46, 47]). These operations enable high data ingestion
rates and efficient retrieval for records of interest [2–12].
2.2

Need for T RINITY

Unfortunately, we find that existing approaches fail to meet
one or more of the requirements outlined above:
Lack of support for low-latency multi-attribute queries.
Multi-attribute queries are challenging to support efficiently;
while scan-based approaches do not scale to large datasets,
building indexes for multiple attributes incurs high storage
overheads while querying and aggregating results from multiple indexes is slow. In-memory databases [38–41] typically

