Self-Managing DRAM: A Low-Cost Framework for
Enabling Autonomous and Efficient DRAM Maintenance Operations
Hasan Hassan†

Ataberk Olgun†

A. Giray Yağlıkçı

Haocong Luo

Onur Mutlu

arXiv:2207.13358v9 [cs.AR] 6 Aug 2025

ETH Zürich
tion [12, 18, 47–122], and 3) memory scrubbing [17, 123–135].1
New DRAM chip generations necessitate making existing maintenance operations more aggressive (e.g., lowering the refresh
period [119, 136, 137]) and introducing new types of maintenance operations (e.g., targeted refresh [64, 66, 138], DDR5
RFM [119], and PRAC [119] as RowHammer defenses).2
Two problems likely hinder the adoption of effective and efficient maintenance mechanisms in modern and future DRAMbased computing systems. First, it is difficult to modify existing
maintenance mechanisms and introduce new maintenance operations because doing so often necessitates changes to the
DRAM interface, which takes a long time (due to various issues
related to standardization and agreement across many vendors
with conflicting interests [4, 6]). Second, it is challenging to
keep the overhead of DRAM maintenance mechanisms low
as DRAM reliability characteristics worsen and DRAM chips
require more aggressive maintenance operations. We expand
on the two problems in the next two paragraphs.
Implementing new maintenance operations (or changing
existing ones) often necessitates modifications in the DRAM interface, memory controller (MC), and potentially other system
components. Such modifications are only possible with a new
DRAM standard, which takes a long time to develop, likely
leading to slow progress in the adoption of new architectural
techniques in DRAM chips. For example, there was a five-year
gap between the DDR3 [140] and DDR4 [141] standards, and
an eight-year gap between the DDR4 [141] and DDR5 [119]
standards. While developing a new standard, DRAM vendors
need to push their proposal regarding the maintenance operations through the JEDEC committee (which is the case even if
the gap between subsequent DRAM standards were to substantially reduce) such that the new standard includes the desired
changes to enable new maintenance operations. Thus, a flexible DRAM interface that decouples improvements to DRAM
maintenance operations from interface changes (and hence the
timeline needed to enable such changes) would allow DRAM
designers to quickly implement custom in-DRAM maintenance
mechanisms and develop more robust, reliable, secure, safe,
and more efficient DRAM chips.
A maintenance operation triggers more frequently and
takes longer with worsening DRAM reliability characteris-

The memory controller is in charge of managing DRAM maintenance operations (e.g., refresh, RowHammer protection, memory scrubbing) to reliably operate modern DRAM chips. Implementing new maintenance operations often necessitates modifications in the DRAM interface, memory controller, and potentially
other system components. Such modifications are only possible
with a new DRAM standard, which takes a long time to develop,
likely leading to slow progress in the adoption of new architectural techniques in DRAM chips.
We propose a new low-cost DRAM architecture, Self-Managing
DRAM (SMD), that enables autonomous in-DRAM maintenance
operations by transferring the responsibility for controlling maintenance operations from the memory controller to the SMD chip.
To enable autonomous maintenance operations, we make a single, simple modification to the DRAM interface, such that an
SMD chip rejects memory controller accesses to DRAM regions
(e.g., a subarray or a bank) under maintenance, while allowing
memory accesses to other DRAM regions. Thus, SMD enables
1) implementing new in-DRAM maintenance mechanisms (or
modifying existing ones) with no further changes in the DRAM
interface, memory controller, or other system components, and
2) overlapping the latency of a maintenance operation in one
DRAM region with the latency of accessing data in another.
We evaluate SMD and show that it 1) can be implemented without adding new pins to the DDRx interface with low latency (0.4%
of row activation latency) and area (1.1% of a 45.5 mm2 DRAM
chip) overhead, 2) achieves 4.1% average speedup across 20 fourcore memory-intensive workloads over a DDR4-based system/DRAM co-design technique that intelligently parallelizes maintenance operations with memory accesses, and 3) guarantees forward progress for rejected memory accesses. We believe and hope
SMD can enable innovations in DRAM architecture to rapidly
come to fruition. We open source all SMD source code and data
at https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/SelfManagingDRAM.

1. Introduction
Advances in manufacturing technology enable increasingly
smaller DRAM cell sizes, continuously reducing cost per bit
of a DRAM chip [1–6]. However, as a DRAM cell becomes
smaller and the distance between adjacent cells shrinks, ensuring reliable and efficient DRAM operation becomes an
even more critical challenge [2, 5, 7–18]. A modern DRAM
chip requires three major types of maintenance operations
(described in detail in §5) for reliable and secure operation: 1) DRAM refresh [17, 19–46], 2) RowHammer protec†

1 Memory scrubbing is not always required in consumer systems but often
used in cloud systems.
2 A very recent update to the DDR5 standard [119] introduces PRAC, which
is an on-DRAM-die read disturbance mitigation mechanism. PRAC requires
more changes to the DRAM interface and continues to use RFM. Note that
PRAC is concurrent with this work, as the initial version of this paper [139]
was placed on arXiv on 27 July 2022 and initial submission to the MICRO 2022
conference was made on 22 April 2022.

H. Hassan and A. Olgun are co-primary authors.

1

tics, increasing density, or increasing operating temperature
with tighter DRAM-system integration (e.g., high-bandwidth
memory DRAM temperature can reach 97 ◦ C [142]). While
a maintenance operation executes, DRAM is unavailable to
serve memory requests (e.g., a periodic refresh operation in
DDR4 prevents access to a DRAM rank for 410 ns [141] and in
DDR5 prevents access to a DRAM bank in all bank groups for
190 ns [119]). As a result, maintenance operations can significantly degrade system performance by delaying critical memory requests. Enabling autonomous maintenance operations
without delaying critical memory requests would improve system performance, energy efficiency, and robustness.
Enabling autonomous operations with a flexible interface
would provide two main benefits. First, it would enable DRAM
manufacturers with breathing room to perform architectural optimizations that can greatly benefit from their DRAM-internal
proprietary knowledge without having to expose such knowledge to off-chip components and third-party manufacturers,
which may be impractical or undesirable [4, 6]. Second, doing
so divides the work nicely between the memory controller and
the DRAM chip. DRAM manufacturers can focus on their critical challenges of designing better DRAM chips and memory
controller manufacturers can focus on the critical tasks for
memory controller without being burdened by other tasks that
are not really easy to optimize at the memory controller level
without proprietary DRAM-internal knowledge.
Our goal is to 1) ease and accelerate the process of implementing new in-DRAM maintenance operations and 2) enable more efficient maintenance operations. To this end, we
propose Self-Managing DRAM (SMD), a new framework that
enables implementing new in-DRAM maintenance operations
and modifying the existing ones with a single, simple interface change that eliminates the need for future changes in the
DRAM interface, the MC, or other system components.3
SMD’s key idea is to allow a DRAM chip to autonomously
and efficiently perform maintenance operations by preventing
memory accesses only to a relatively small, under-maintenance
DRAM region, i.e., a designated section in a DRAM chip (e.g.,
a DRAM subarray or a bank), while allowing memory accesses to other DRAM regions.4 To prevent access to an undermaintenance DRAM region, an SMD chip rejects a row activation command (i.e., ACT) issued by the MC to the region. To
ensure that a DRAM region cannot be locked for too long, SMD
enforces a minimum delay between consecutive maintenance

operations targeting the same region. We comprehensively
study SMD and show that it ensures forward progress for
memory requests (§4.5). While a DRAM region is under maintenance, the MC can access other regions. This way, a majority
of memory accesses are not delayed by maintenance operations
as SMD overlaps the latency of a maintenance operation in a
DRAM region with memory accesses to other DRAM regions.
To enable practical adoption of SMD, we propose to implement it with low-cost modifications to existing DRAM chips
and MCs. First, to inform the MC that a row activation is rejected, SMD uses a single uni-directional pin on the DRAM
chip (which already exists in DDR4/5, see §6). Second, SMD
implements a small (e.g., 16 bits per DRAM bank) memory
structure called the Lock Controller in a DRAM chip for managing regions under maintenance and preventing access to
them. Third, SMD adds a new row address latch for every lock
region in a DRAM chip to enable accessing one lock region
while another is under maintenance (building on the basic
design proposed in prior works [19, 148, 149]). In §6, we show
that these modifications have low DRAM chip area (1.1% of a
45.5 mm2 DRAM chip) and negligible latency overhead (only
0.4% increase in row activation latency).
We demonstrate the usefulness and versatility of SMD by
implementing three in-DRAM maintenance mechanisms for
DRAM refresh (§5.1), RowHammer protection (§5.2), and memory scrubbing (§5.3). We rigorously evaluate SMD’s impact on
system performance and energy efficiency using cycle-accurate
memory system simulations (using Ramulator [150, 151]), executing a diverse set of 62 single-core and 60 four-core workloads. We compare SMD-based implementations of the evaluated maintenance mechanisms to their MC-based implementations. We make two key observations from our evaluation.
First, an SMD chip that implements lock regions at subarray
granularity (i.e., a maintenance mechanism locks a small designated section in a bank) and implements all three maintenance
mechanisms (refresh, RowHammer protection, and scrubbing)
1) improves average performance across all memory-intensive
four-core workloads by 8.6% compared to a baseline system
with a DDR4 chip that supports bank-level refresh and a memory controller that intelligently schedules maintenance operations to avoid delaying main memory accesses (DARP [19])
and 2) outperforms an optimized state-of-the-art system in
which the DDR4 chip can concurrently perform a maintenance
operation in a subarray and a memory access in another subarray (maintenance-access parallelization) and the memory
controller can intelligently exploit maintenance-access parallelization (e.g., similar to DSARP’s [19] refresh-access parallelization) by 4.1%. SMD provides 88.3% of the speedup provided by an oracle (No-Refresh) that completely mitigates the
overhead of maintenance operations, on average across all
evaluated high memory intensity four core workloads. Second,
SMD reduces DRAM energy consumption by 4.3% on average
as it eliminates DRAM commands issued by the memory controller to perform maintenance operations and reduces total
execution time. We conclude that SMD practically provides

3 The current commodity DRAM interface (e.g., DDRx [119, 140, 141],
HBMx [143, 144]) is completely processor centric (i.e., the memory controller
on the processor chip dictates everything to the DRAM chips, giving no breathing room for DRAM to do much on its own). SMD, by slightly modifying the
interface, enables the interface to move towards and more memory-centric
approach where memory can do things autonomously. This is in line with the
general memory-centric computing paradigm [145–147] where memory can
also do computation.
4 SMD has the key property that the MC does not even know which maintenance operations an SMD chip performs. This property of SMD could also
be appealing to DRAM vendors [4, 6] because it would allow vendor-, and
chip-generation-specific DRAM resilience characteristics (e.g., the degree and
distribution of RowHammer vulnerability and retention failures) to remain
undisclosed (i.e., not exposed to other DRAM vendors or system designers).

2

