SOFA: A Compute-Memory Optimized Sparsity
Accelerator via Cross-Stage Coordinated Tiling
Huizheng Wang∗ , Jiahao Fang∗ , Xinru Tang∗ , Zhiheng Yue∗ , Jinxi Li∗ , Yubin Qin∗ , Sihan Guan∗ , Qize Yang∗ ,
Yang Wang∗ , Chao Li† , Yang Hu∗ and Shouyi Yin∗
∗ School of Integrated Circuits, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

I. I NTRODUCTION
Remarkable success has been witnessed recently in the
development of Transformer architecture [1], for both natural
language processing (NLP) [2]–[10] and computer vision (CV)
tasks [11]–[19]. The impressive capabilities of Transformers
greatly stems from their self-attention module, which excels
at extracting global context information [20]. Typically, selfattention modules take three matrices as their inputs: namely,
Q (query), K (key) and V (value). First, an attention matrix
A∈ RS×S is obtained by multiplying Q and K, where S is
sequence length. Next, A goes through the softmax function
for normalization, then is multiplied by V for the final output.
Large language models (LLMs) have driven the transformer architecture to unprecedented levels of complexity
and capability, particularly in handling extended sequence
lengths [21]. This evolution places heightened demands on
inference capabilities and throughput [22], critically impacting
the performance of key transformer components: the attention

Memory and Computation Overheads Breakdown
(MB)
Mem.
1e5

QKV

Atten

FFN

Computation

QKV

Atten

FFN

%
100

1e4

75

1e3

50

1e2

25
4k

16k 32k 64k 128k
Llama-7B

4k

8k

14k 32k
ViT-B

Computation Ratio

Abstract—Benefiting from the self-attention mechanism, Transformer models have attained impressive contextual comprehension capabilities for lengthy texts. The requirements of highthroughput inference arise as the large language models (LLMs)
become increasingly prevalent, which calls for large-scale token
parallel processing (LTPP). However, existing dynamic sparse
accelerators struggle to effectively handle LTPP, as they solely
focus on separate stage optimization, and with most efforts confined to computational enhancements. By re-examining the endto-end flow of dynamic sparse acceleration, we pinpoint an everoverlooked opportunity that the LTPP can exploit the intrinsic
coordination among stages to avoid excessive memory access
and redundant computation. Motivated by our observation, we
present SOFA, a cross-stage compute-memory efficient algorithmhardware co-design, which is tailored to tackle the challenges
posed by LTPP of Transformer inference effectively. We first
propose a novel leading zero computing paradigm, which predicts
attention sparsity by using log-based add-only operations to avoid
the significant overhead of prediction. Then, a distributed sorting
and a sorted updating FlashAttention mechanism are proposed
with cross-stage coordinated tiling principle, which enables finegrained and lightweight coordination among stages, helping
optimize memory access and latency. Further, we propose a SOFA
accelerator to support these optimizations efficiently. Extensive
experiments on 20 benchmarks show that SOFA achieves 9.5×
speed up and 71.5× higher energy efficiency than Nvidia A100
GPU. Compared to 8 SOTA accelerators, SOFA achieves an
average 15.8× energy efficiency, 10.3× area efficiency and 9.3×
speed up, respectively.

Memory Footprint

arXiv:2407.10416v1 [cs.AR] 15 Jul 2024

† School of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

126k

Fig. 1. Transformer memory and computation breakdown for long sequence.

module, feed-forward network (FFN) module, and the querykey-value (QKV) computations.
Traditionally, in Transformers designed for smaller sequence lengths(≤2k), the FFN module typically presented the
main bottleneck due to its dense computational requirements.
However, with recent advancements in processing long text,
where sequence lengths can exceed 128,000 characters [23]–
[25], the performance bottleneck is shifting from the FFN
to the attention module. Our detailed profiling indicates that
as sequence lengths surpass 32,000 characters, the attention
module becomes the dominant factor affecting inference time,
as shown in Fig.1. This shift is primarily because the complexity of the attention mechanism scales quadratically with
sequence length, making it increasingly challenging to manage
as sequences extend.
Dynamic sparsity (DS) acceleration [26]–[33] have emerged
as a promising solution to mitigate the latency issue of selfattention. The key idea is to predict vital Q-K pairs at runtime
and calculate attention based on these vital pairs to reduce the
inference latency. Typically, it consists of three stages. A precompute stage firstly estimates the matrix A (denoted as Â).
Then, a top-k stage picks the vital Q-K pairs. In the subsequent
formal computing stage, self-attention is calculated only based
on the vital pairs.
The need for high parallelism of dynamic sparsity token
processing in the context of LLM inference is increasing,
especially during the prefill stage. In this stage, entire contexts
are processed simultaneously, favoring high token parallelism
to enhance efficiency. This scenario is especially meaningful
as modern LLM inference often employs separate deployments
for the prefill and decode stages [34], [35]. Moreover, the
advent of speculative inference [36] can transform decode
operations into prefill tasks, further emphasizing the need for
efficient large-scale token processing parallelism (LTPP).

However, supporting dynamic sparsity with large-scale token parallel processing would present prohibitive overheads, as
shown in Fig. 2. This is because, firstly, current dynamic sparsity acceleration solutions lack efficient prediction schemes
to reduce computation complexity. Though calculating selfattention based on vital Q-K pairs can be beneficial in reducing
compute and memory consumption, the newly introduced precompute and top-k stages consume non-trivial computational
and memory resources when large amounts of tokens are
processed, which can even offset the benefits brought by sparsity acceleration methods in some cases. Our characterization
depicts that even with 4-bit during the prediction stage and 16bit during the formal stage, the power overhead of prediction
is already 1.4× that of formal computing when top-k equals
20%. Unfortunately, the overhead in prediction will further
rise sharply with increased parallelism.
Secondly, the processing stages in current dynamic sparsity
acceleration are not designed to be partitionable, and miss the
opportunity to support fine-grained pipelining, which would
enable more efficient processing. The top-k sorting must be
based on the readiness of the whole row of Pre-Atten matrix. In
LTPP scenarios, the increased delay in processing each stage
accumulates continuously, ultimately resulting in a significant
increase in end-to-end latency. This ”whole-row-processing”
style also increases the amount of intermediate data, resulting
in a substantial rise in DRAM access requirements. Fig. 3
shows the memory access time (MAT) of two SOTA accelerators when scaled to process multiple tokens. The increase
in parallelism leads to a sharp rise in off-chip memory access
and surging MAT. On average, the MAT ratio rises to 72%,
overshadowing computation time and becoming the primary
bottleneck.
Thirdly, current dynamic sparsity acceleration solutions do
not exploit cross-stage coordination, missing the opportunity to
reduce the computation complexity of later stages by leveraging guidance extracted from former stages. Although FlashAttention2 (FA-2) already provides a tiling scheme for softmax
to reduce memory access overhead, the decreased memory
access comes with surging computations. This occurs because
repeated exponentiation and comparison operations are necessary to refresh the MAX among tiles, ensuring the correctness
of the global MAX value. We observe an opportunity to guide
FA-2 computation with top-k information. These limitations
highlight the need for more advanced strategies to manage
dynamic sparsity with LTPP effectively.
Our Insights: Motivated by the challenges, we observe
an opportunity that breaks down the computation, memory,
and latency overheads in each stage by adopting a cross-stage
coordinated tiling strategy, thus a stage is decomposed into
fine-grained sub-stages. Therefore the process in the following
stages doesn’t have to wait for the finish of processes in the last
stage. The coordination among stages becomes more swift and
excessive DRAM memory access could be saved. Notably, it
is non-trivial to achieve this goal as we need to figure out
effective methods to partition top-k module and efficiently
forward the information to formal stages.

We propose an algorithm-hardware co-design for attention
optimizations, named SOFA. It features three key designs that
correlate to three challenges, as depicted in Fig. 6. First, the
computation overhead in pre-compute stage is alleviated via
a multiplier-free differential leading zero summation (DLZS)
paradigm, which helps reduce the sparsity prediction overhead
of each tile. Second, we propose a sphere-search-aided distributed sorting (SADS), which distributes a long segment into
sub-segments to execute individual tiled sorting, while effectively reducing total comparisons. Third, we propose a sortedupdating FlashAttention (SU-FA). It skillfully decouples the
softmax row-dependence to enable the formal computing
stage tiling, while leveraging cross-stage sorting information
to reduce computation. In summary, DLZS and SADS together serve as a low-complexity prediction (LP) mechanism
to reduce prediction overhead. SADS collaborates with SUFA, employing fine-grained tiling for sparse acceleration, to
optimize memory access and processing latency.
We propose a dedicated accelerator to support the proposed
mechanism effectively. Compared to naive implementation,
which only has a limited 19.6× energy saving over Nvidia
A100 GPU, SOFA accelerator improves its performance with
four novel algorithm-hardware co-designs.
Evaluated on 20 benchmarks, SOFA achieves an average
energy efficiency of 7183 GOPS/W, which is 71.5× and
average 15.8× higher than Nvidia A100 GPU and 8 SOTA
accelerators, respectively. Overall, SOFA outperforms GPU
A100 9.5× and TPU 11.1×, respectively. We also conduct
comprehensive ablation on GPU to quantify the performance
benefits brought by our software mechanism and various hardware components. Evaluations on GPU/TPU show, SOFA’s
software optimization provides 3.16 × /2.8× speedup, while
hardware acceleration enables a 3.03 × /3.9× speedup.
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
A. Preliminaries for Transformer
Fig. 4(a) shows a typical Transformer model: an input sequence containing S tokens is transformed into an embedding
matrix X ∈ RS×H , projected to Q, K and V spaces, split
into A chunks RS×H/A , and processed by multi-head attention
(MHA) to generate an attention matrix. The attention matrix,
after softmax and multiplication with V, resulting in a matrix
O ∈ RS×(H/A) . Outputs from all heads are concatenated,
projected by WO ∈ RS×H , and passed through the FFN with
two fully connected layers to generate final outputs.
Computation Properties Analysis. We analyze the operation intensity (OI) [37] for the three parts of a Transformer
layer. As shown in Fig. 4(b), MHA exhibits notably lower
OI, averaging 15% of the FFN. This means MHA requires
more data movement for the same computation FLOPs, due
to element-wise operations. Fig. 4(c) further illustrates the
relationship between the OI of MHA and the token processing
parallelism. We can figure increasing parallelism effectively
boosts OI, thus theoretically reducing the demand for data
movement under equivalent computational power and PE
utilization. This gain is attributed to increased data reuse.

2

