Duplex: A Device for Large Language Models with Mixture of
Experts, Grouped Query Attention, and Continuous Batching
Sungmin Yun: , Kwanhee Kyung: , Juhwan Cho: , Jaewan Choi: , Jongmin Kim: ,
Byeongho Kim; , Sukhan Lee; , Kyomin Sohn; , Jung Ho Ahn:
: Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, ; Samsung Electronics, Hwasung, South Korea

arXiv:2409.01141v1 [cs.AR] 2 Sep 2024

{sungmin.yun, kwanhee5, jfcho2, cjw9202, jongmin.kim, gajh}@snu.ac.kr
{bh1122.kim, sh1026.lee, kyomin.sohn}@samsung.com

Abstract—Large language models (LLMs) have emerged due
to their capability to generate high-quality content across diverse
contexts. To reduce their explosively increasing demands for computing resources, a mixture of experts (MoE) has emerged. The
MoE layer enables exploiting a huge number of parameters with
less computation. Applying state-of-the-art continuous batching
increases throughput; however, it leads to frequent DRAM access
in the MoE and attention layers. We observe that conventional
computing devices have limitations when processing the MoE
and attention layers, which dominate the total execution time
and exhibit low arithmetic intensity (Op/B). Processing MoE
layers only with devices targeting low-Op/B such as processing-inmemory (PIM) architectures is challenging due to the fluctuating
Op/B in the MoE layer caused by continuous batching.
To address these challenges, we propose Duplex, which comprises xPU tailored for high-Op/B and Logic-PIM to effectively
perform low-Op/B operation within a single device. Duplex selects
the most suitable processor based on the Op/B of each layer
within LLMs. As the Op/B of the MoE layer is at least 1 and
that of the attention layer has a value of 4–8 for grouped query
attention, prior PIM architectures are not efficient, which place
processing units inside DRAM dies and only target extremely lowOp/B (under one) operations. Based on recent trends, Logic-PIM
adds more through-silicon vias (TSVs) to enable high-bandwidth
communication between the DRAM die and the logic die and
place powerful processing units on the logic die, which is best
suited for handling low-Op/B operations ranging from few to a
few dozens. To maximally utilize the xPU and Logic-PIM, we
propose expert and attention co-processing. By exploiting proper
processing units for MoE and attention layers, Duplex shows up
to 2.67ˆ higher throughput and consumes 42.0% less energy
compared to GPU systems for LLM inference.
Index Terms—large language models, processing-in-memory,
mixture of experts, grouped query attention, continuous batching

I. I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 [3] and GPT4 [39] are gaining enormous prominence due to their excellent
output quality in a vast range of applications. Increasing the
number of model parameters has been a principal strategy to
improve the quality of an LLM under the premise that the
larger the model is, the better the output quality becomes.
However, such a straightforward scaling approach cannot
persist due to the computational challenge.
Recently, LLMs have employed a Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) [2], [11], [46] construction on top of existing models
as an efficient method to increase the number of model

parameters without severely bloating the computational overhead, enabling faster training time than LLM without MoE.
The MoE layer replaces the conventional feed-forward network (FFN), mainly composed of matrix-matrix multiplication
(GEMM) operations between inputs and trained weights, with
a collection of multiple expert FFNs (experts in short) and a
gate to choose between experts. In GLaM [8], for example, by
utilizing only two out of the total 64 experts, the computational
load remains equivalent to a 10B model, achieving the effect
of using a 143B model.
Adopting continuous batching [56] in inferring LLMs with
MoE layers introduces new computational challenges. Continuous batching is a state-of-the-art scheduling technique that
decomposes each inference request into multiple stages and
batches these requests at the stage level in a lockstep manner.
It maximizes the utilization of computing resources through
fine-grained scheduling, allowing newly arrived requests to
participate with minimal queuing delay, thereby increasing
throughput. However, this batching strategy also increases the
number of experts concurrently used in MoE layers, increasing
off-chip memory (DRAM) access for loading the parameters
of these experts (e.g., 64 for GLaM). Further, the amount of
DRAM access in the attention layers in conventional LLMs
also increases when batching is applied [40]. We observed
that the MoE and attention layers, which have low arithmetic
intensity (Op/B) in most stages, take most of the inference time
on conventional systems such as GPUs, falling utilization of
its computing resources under 10%.
However, processing an MoE layer only with devices targeting low-Op/B cannot handle the fluctuation of Op/B in MoE
layers by continuous batching. Even if the Op/B of MoE layers
stays at low-Op/B in most stages, the arrival of a new request
significantly increases the Op/B of an MoE layer due to a
large number of tokens corresponding to the input sequence
passing through the MoE layer. Processing these layers solely
with devices targeting low-Op/B struggle due to insufficient
computing power, thereby exacerbating the latency of the MoE
layer and deteriorating user experience. In such cases, using
devices with high computing power (e.g., GPUs) is preferred.
A recent work [40] proposed a heterogeneous system that
uses processors targeting low-Op/B to alleviate DRAM bandwidth bottleneck in the attention layer and utilizes GPUs to
process other layers. Replicating MoE layers to both devices

