arXiv:2407.16006v1 [cs.CR] 22 Jul 2024

ImPress: Securing DRAM Against Data-Disturbance
Errors via Implicit Row-Press Mitigation
Moinuddin Qureshi

Anish Saxena

Aamer Jaleel

Georgia Tech
moin@gatech.edu

Georgia Tech
anish.saxena@cc.gatech.edu

NVIDIA
ajaleel@nvidia.com

Abstract—DRAM cells are susceptible to Data-Disturbance Errors (DDE), which can be exploited by an attacker to compromise
system security. Rowhammer is a well-known DDE vulnerability
that occurs when a row is repeatedly activated. Rowhammer
can be mitigated by tracking aggressor rows inside DRAM (inDRAM) or at the Memory Controller (MC). Row-Press (RP) is a
new DDE vulnerability that occurs when a row is kept open for
a long time. RP significantly reduces the number of activations
required to induce an error, thus breaking existing RH solutions.
Prior work on Explicit Row-Press mitigation, ExPress, requires
the memory controller to limit the maximum row-open-time, and
redesign existing Rowhammer solutions with reduced Rowhammer threshold. Unfortunately, ExPress incurs significant performance and storage overheads, and being a memory controllerbased solution, it is incompatible with in-DRAM trackers.
In this paper, we propose Implicit Row-Press mitigation (ImPress), which does not restrict row-open-time, is compatible with
memory controller-based and in-DRAM solutions and does not
reduce the tolerated Rowhammer threshold. ImPress treats a
row open for a specified time as equivalent to an activation. We
design ImPress by developing a Unified Charge-Loss Model, which
combines the net effect of both Rowhammer and Row-Press for
arbitrary patterns. We analyze both controller-based (Graphene
and PARA) and in-DRAM trackers (Mithril and MINT). We
show that ImPress makes Rowhammer solutions resilient to RowPress transparently, without affecting the Rowhammer threshold.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Relentless scaling over the last four decades has increased
the capacity of DRAM chips from a few megabits to several
tens of gigabits. As DRAM cells get smaller, they become
prone to inter-cell interference, where the activity in one
cell can disturb the data in another cell, leading to DataDisturbance Errors (DDE). DDEs are not just a reliability
concern but also a serious security threat, as attackers can
exploit DDEs to compromise system security [9, 38].
Rowhammer: The most well-known DDE vulnerability of
DRAM is Rowhammer (RH) [21]. Rowhammer occurs when
an aggressor row is activated a large number of times, which
causes bit-flips in the neighboring victim rows. Several studies
[1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 38, 42] have shown that Rowhammer can be
exploited to compromise security. For example, an attacker
can flip bits in page-tables to escalate privilege [38], flip bits
in instruction opcode to bypass authentication [33], or analyze
flipped bits to infer the data of nearby pages [22].
The number of activations (ACTs) to the aggressor row
required to induce a bit-flip is called the Rowhammer Threshold (TRH). The latest publicly available characterization data
reports a TRH of 4.8K [17]. Typical hardware-based defenses
for Rowhammer rely on a tracking mechanism [16, 16, 18,

21, 26, 30, 32, 40] to identify aggressors and refresh the
victim rows [10]. The tracking can be either at the MemoryController (MC) or within the DRAM (in-DRAM). Solutions
for mitigating RH are designed for a specific TRH, which
assumes DRAM will not incur bit-flips if the activation count
is below the specified TRH. These solutions can be broken if a
vulnerability causes bit flips with fewer than TRH activations.
Row-Press: A recent paper [25] discloses a new DDE vulnerability, Row-Press (RP), which occurs when a row is kept
open for a long time. While the row is open, the cells of
the neighboring rows slowly leak charge on the bit-lines. The
cumulative charge loss increases with time. Therefore, a RowPress pattern keeps the row open for as long as possible. The
row may eventually close due to a row conflict or refresh
operation. Such a Row-Press attack pattern is repeated until
the charge on the neighboring cell is depleted enough to cause
a flip. Figure 1 (a) compares the pattern of RH and RP.
Impact of Row-Press: The impact of Row-Press depends on
how long the row is kept open. Each round incurs an activation
of the given row. Luo et al. [25] provide a detailed characterization of Row-Press and show that the number of activation
rounds required to succeed is 18x to 160x lower compared
to the number of activations required by a standalone RH
attack. If the row is kept open for 30ms (note that this is not
possible in DDR specifications, as they require that refresh be
performed within a few tens of microseconds), then a single
round of Row-Press attack may be enough to flip a bit.
Figure 1 (b) captures the impact of Row-Press on TRH. RP
reduces the number of activations required to cause a bit-flip
to much lower than TRH (e.g. 18x compared to Rowhammer alone [25]). Thus, RP breaks RH-mitigation designed
to tolerate a threshold of TRH, as such solutions inherently
assume that no bit-flip occurs if the row gets fewer than TRH
activations. Therefore, RP is a serious security vulnerability.
Explicit Row-Press Management: Luo et al. [25] also
proposed a design to tolerate Row-Press attacks, which forces
the Memory Controller (MC) to limit the amount of time a row
can be kept open to Maximum Row Open time (tMRO). For
example, let T RH denote the threshold for the standalone RH
attack. The number of activations, T ∗, required for Row-Press
to flip bits is characterized, with the maximum aggressor open
time (tON) being limited to tMRO. The proposal redesigns
the RH-mitigation to cater to the lower threshold, T*, instead
of TRH. We term this design Explicit Row-Press (ExPress)
Mitigation. Figure 1(c) provides an overview of ExPress.

ACT
Row Open
Row-Press
(a) Attack patterns for RH and RP

Treat a row open for tRC as ACT
(No reduced threshold)

T
Limit tON to tMRO
T*

Treat as ACT for RH-Mitigation

}
}

RH-Threshold (TRH)

Rowhammer

Tune RH solutions to T*
(Reduced threshold)

Row-Press reduces TRH
(breaks RH solutions)

ACTs to Same Row

ACT

tRC

tRC

Row Open
Row Open-Time (tON)

tMRO

(b) Impact of RP on TRH

(c) Explicit Row-Press Mitigation

(d) Implicit Row-Press Mitigation

Fig. 1. Towards practical Row-Press solution: (a) Attack pattern for Rowhammer and Row-Press (b) Impact of RowPress on the Rowhammer Threshold (c)
Explicit Row-Press (ExPress) [25] mitigation, which limits the aggressor row-open time (tON) to tMRO, reduces the tolerated RH threshold (d) Our proposal,
Implicit Row-Press (ImPress) mitigation, treats a row-open for tRC as equivalent to an activation (ACT) for RH-mitigation, retains the same RH threshold.

Pitfalls of ExPress: The key shortcoming of ExPress is that it
reduces the tolerated threshold from TRH to T*. Additionally,
ExPress suffers from the following three problems:
(1) High performance overheads: Early row closure reduces
the row buffer hits for workloads with good spatial locality.
Furthermore, tuning the RH solution to a lower threshold (T*)
increases the rate of mitigation and the associated penalty.
(2) High storage overheads: If the tracking mechanism is
based on counters, the number of tracking entries increases
due to the reduction in threshold from TRH to T*.
(3) Incompatibility with in-DRAM Trackers: ExPress is a
memory controller-based solution, as it must limit tON to
tMRO. Therefore, it is incompatible with in-DRAM Rowhammer schemes that are unaware of tMRO value, unless JEDEC
specifications are revised to standardize tMRO.

refresh into windows of tRC. If an activation occurs in the
given tRC window, that row participates in RH-tracking. If a
row is open for the full tRC window, then that row is treated
as equivalent to causing an activation, and also participates in
RH-tracking. Impress-N limits the impact of unmitigated RP
to at-most one tRC. As Impress-N can underestimate RowPress activity, it can reduce the threshold (T*) by 1.35x-2x,
which is identical to ExPress at the corresponding tON. While
ImPress-N has similar impact on threshold, performance, and
storage as ExPress, ImPress-N is compatible with in-DRAM
tracking as it does not limit row open time.
Our optimized design, Impress-P (Precise), operates on precise values of damage, including non-integer values. ImPress-P
dynamically tracks the row-open time (tON) and converts it
into an Equivalent Activation Count (EACT). We modify the
RH trackers to operate on non-integer values. For example, a
probabilistic solution that mitigates with probability p would
now select the row with probability p × EACT . A counterbased tracker would increment the counter by EACT instead
of 1. As Impress-P is precise, it maintains the same tolerated
threshold (TRH) as a system that does not have RP mitigation.
We analyze ImPress with both memory controller-based
(Graphene and PARA) and in-DRAM (Mithril and MINT)
trackers, and show that ImPress is effective at tolerating RowPress for both categories. The storage required for ImPress-P
is 1.25x, whereas it is 2x for both ExPress and ImPress-N.

Our Goal: The goal of our paper is a Row-Press solution
which (i) does not place any limit on row-open time, (ii)
does not affect the TRH tolerated by a Rowhammer solution,
(iii) incurs low performance and storage overheads, and (iv) is
applicable to both memory controller-based and in-DRAM RH
solutions (without requiring changes to JEDEC specifications).
Our Insight: Our key insight is that secure RH-mitigation
schemes are designed to handle the case when an activation
occurs at every tRC (row-cycle time). If a row is open for a
particular time period (say, tRC), then we treat it as equivalent
to causing an activation, and the row participates in the
RH-mitigation. Doing so, converts the Row-Press attack into
an equivalent Rowhammer attack and lets the RH solution
transparently handle RP, without limiting the row open time.

Contributions: This paper makes the following contributions:
1) We observe that Row-Press can be transparently handled, without limiting tON, by treating a row open for
tRC as equivalent to an activation for RH schemes.

Our Solution: We propose Implicit Row-Press (ImPress)
Mitigation, as shown in Figure 1(d). To drive the design of
ImPress, we first develop a Unified Charge-Leakage Model
that combines the effect of both Rowhammer and Row-Press
into a single metric. Both RP and RH damage the data in the
cell by causing charge loss, albeit at a different rate. Our model
normalizes the rate-of-damage caused by RP (per tRC) to the
rate-of-damage caused by RH (per tRC). Our model estimates
the combined damage caused by RH and RP, for any pattern.
Our first design, Impress-N (Naive), operates on integer
values of damage, to demonstrate the impact of imprecise damage estimation. Impress-N divides the time interval between

2) We develop a Unified Charge-Leakage Model to capture
the net effect of RP and RH for any given pattern into a
single number and use this metric to guide our design.
3) We propose ImPress-N, which treats a row open for the
full time window of tRC as equivalent to an activation.
ImPress-N limits the impact of unmitigated Row-Press
to tRC, reducing Rowhammer threshold by 1.35x-2x.
4) We propose ImPress-P, which tracks tON and uses the
damage due to RP and RH precisely into RH solutions.
ImPress-P does not reduce the tolerated RH threshold
and tolerates RP with negligible overheads.

2

