STAR: Sub-Entry Sharing-Aware TLB for
Multi-Instance GPU
Bingyao Li

Yueqi Wang

Tianyu Wang

Lieven Eeckhout

University of Pittsburgh
bil35@pitt.edu

University of Pittsburgh
yuw249@pitt.edu

University of Pittsburgh
tiw81@pitt.edu

Ghent University
lieven.eeckhout@ugent.be

Jun Yang

Aamer Jaleel

Xulong Tang

University of Pittsburgh
juy9@pitt.edu

NVIDIA
ajaleel@nvidia.com

University of Pittsburgh
tax6@pitt.edu

Abstract—NVIDIA’s Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) technology
enables partitioning GPU computing power and memory into separate hardware instances, providing complete isolation including
compute resources, caches, and memory. However, prior work
identifies that MIG does not partition the last-level TLB (i.e., L3
TLB), which remains shared among all instances. To enhance
TLB reach, NVIDIA GPUs reorganized the TLB structure with
16 sub-entries in each L3 TLB entry that have a one-to-one
mapping to the address translations for 16 pages of size 64 KB
located within the same 1 MB aligned range. Our comprehensive
investigation of address translation efficiency in MIG identifies
two main issues caused by L3 TLB sharing interference: (i) it
results in performance degradation for co-running applications,
and (ii) TLB sub-entries are not fully utilized before eviction.
Based on this observation, we propose STAR to improve the
utilization of TLB sub-entries through dynamic sharing of TLB
entries across multiple base addresses. STAR evaluates TLB
entries based on their sub-entry utilization to optimize address
translation storage, dynamically adjusting between a shared and
non-shared state to cater to current demand. We show that
STAR improves overall performance by an average of 28.7%
across various multi-tenant workloads.
Index Terms—multi-instance GPU, sub-entry TLB

I. I NTRODUCTION
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are extensively utilized
in contemporary computing systems to accelerate performance
across various applications. As artificial intelligence/ML models evolve, GPU manufacturers are continually enhancing the
capabilities of individual GPUs to meet the surging computational demands [16], [20], [26], [52], [61], [64]. However,
previous research has shown that these emerging applications
still cannot fully exploit the existing GPU computational
resources due to different workloads facing various resource
bottlenecks and exhibiting different sensitivities to different
resources [6], [25], [29], [38], [58], [62].
To address the issue of underutilization, GPU vendors
are evolving to offer GPU resource partitioning capabilities
to enable multiple applications to share the same physical
GPU resources. NVIDIA’s Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) [36]
is one of the prominent GPU-sharing technologies. MIG
enables a single physical GPU to be divided into several
isolated instances, each with its own set of resources, including

streaming multiprocessors (SMs), local memory, and caches.
NVIDIA MIG is designed to offer isolation of resources for
each instance, ensuring performance without interference from
other instances. However, a recent study [63] has indicated that
while MIG effectively partitions most of the memory system, it
does not partition the last-level TLB (i.e., L3 TLB). The shared
L3 TLB allows the TLB to dynamically allocate its entries
based on the demand from various instances, optimizing the
use of the available TLB capacity. On the flip side, TLB sharing also leads to contention among multi-tenant applications.
With the increasingly large data sets and wide memory
footprints of applications, the TLB has become a critical
performance bottleneck [32], [33], [41], [42], [44], [50].
Expanding the TLB size to alleviate this issue is impractical
due to hardware size constraints. In response, NVIDIA’s new
generation GPU (e.g., A100) presents an innovative TLB
architecture to enhance TLB reach. Specifically, in the L2 and
L3 TLBs, an entry comprises 16 sub-entries, each directly
corresponding to the address translation of 16 sequential
64 KB pages within a contiguous 1 MB-aligned segment,
as recently revealed through reverse-engineering [63]. By
compressing multiple translations into a single TLB entry,
the TLB can manage more data with fewer entries, thereby
reducing hardware overhead, while improving TLB efficiency
and boosting overall performance. A sub-entry TLB design
performs well for isolated workloads that use large contiguous
memory, however, in multi-tenant setups where the L3 TLB
is shared, this design can lead to sub-entry underutilization
because interference from co-runners causes frequent evictions
when only a portion of the sub-entries are used.
To understand the impact of L3 TLB contention in a multitenant environment, we co-run representative GPU applications on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with MIG enabled, see
Figure 1 where each application runs within its own instance
while sharing the L3 TLB. The GPU is partitioned into varying
sizes of instances, including (3g, 2g, 2g) and (3g, 3g), where
‘g’ represents the allocation of computing resources; each
instance runs a single application. Performance is normalized
to each application running alone on its respective instance,
thereby having exclusive access to the L3 TLB. We observe

3:2:2

VGG
ResNet

DenseNet
DenseNet

NW
NW

ATAX
ATAX

VGG
ResNet
ResNext

CONV
MT
ST

MT
ATAX
ST

0.4
0.2
0.0

MT
ATAX
BICG

Normalized
performance

1.0
0.8
0.6

3:3

Fig. 1. Performance of co-running applications on NVIDIA’s A100.

that L3 TLB contention significantly degrades the performance
of individual applications. This is because high access demand
and interference from co-running applications lead to severe
TLB thrashing. This thrashing extends the reuse distance
of address translations, making translations less likely to be
reused before they are evicted. It also leads to lower sub-entry
utilization at the point of eviction, as the interference from
concurrent requests accelerates TLB eviction (quantitative
results and detailed analysis are given in Section IV).
A large body of prior work focused on improving address
translation efficiency from multiple perspectives, including
contiguity-based range TLBs [24], [28], [41], [56], cluster
TLBs [42], [44], employing large pages [8], [40], [43], TLB
compression [51], and TLB speculation [10]. Many of these
optimizations are designed for single GPU/CPU setups running one application and are not effectively applicable to
MIG environments with multiple tenants. First, range-TLB,
cluster-TLB, and TLB-compression strategies are optimized
for sequential and stride memory access patterns, commonly
found within individual applications. Co-running applications
often have varied and unpredictable access patterns, making
it challenging for these TLB optimizations to consistently
capture the requested translations efficiently. Second, TLB
speculation relies on the assumption of consistent access
patterns to achieve accurate predictions. Similarly, in scenarios where the L3 TLB is accessed by multiple applications
simultaneously, the interference between applications disrupts
the regularity of memory accesses, significantly diminishing
prediction accuracy. Third, using large pages can increase TLB
reach by reducing the number of TLB entries needed to cover
the same memory range. However, multi-tenant environments
often host a mix of applications with diverse memory access
patterns. While some applications can efficiently leverage large
pages, others with irregular or sparse access patterns may
not observe the same benefits. This variance leaves those
less suited to large pages still facing contention issues. Other
work, for example MASK [9], improves address translation
efficiency in multi-application environments by controlling
warp access to the shared TLB through an epoch- and tokenbased scheme. Although this approach is effective at reducing
TLB thrashing, it helps little with TLB sub-entry utilization.
Motivated by these challenges, we systematically investigate
and optimize the address translation in MIG systems. Our
quantitative analysis reveals that contention in the L3 TLB
critically undermines MIG performance, primarily due to low
utilization of TLB sub-entries caused by multi-tenant interfer-

ence. To address this, we propose the Sub-EnTry ShAringAwaRe (STAR) TLB, which dynamically allows different
base addresses to share TLB entries. Specifically, instead
of defaulting to Least Recently Used (LRU) eviction upon
receiving a new address translation, our method evaluates
and selects an entry based on its current sub-entry utilization
that satisfies the sharing criteria for inserting the new address
translation. Additionally, our approach can dynamically switch
between a TLB entry’s shared and non-shared states, adapting
to the fluctuating demands of TLB sub-entries. We make the
following contributions:
• We show that a major performance bottleneck in MIG arises
from severe contention in the shared L3 TLB. We provide
a detailed analysis of how multi-tenant interference affects
address translation reuse and TLB sub-entry utilization.
• We propose STAR, a hardware design tailored to mitigate
the negative effects of multi-tenant interference and enhance
overall application performance. STAR enables multiple base
addresses to share the same TLB entry, enhancing sub-entry
utilization. It also dynamically switches between shared and
non-shared states to adapt to varying application demands.
• We show that STAR improves overall performance by an
average of 28.7% across a suite of multi-tenant workloads.
We show that STAR outperforms various TLB design alternatives and is orthogonal to these approaches to achieve further
performance improvement.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Multi-Instance GPU
Modern GPUs, such as NVIDIA’s Ampere and Hopper
generations (e.g., A100 and H100), leverage Multi-Instance
GPU (MIG) technology to enhance resource utilization by
enabling the sharing and partitioning of GPU resources [1],
[37]. MIG technology allows a single GPU to be divided
into multiple GPU partitions, each operating as an independent GPU instance with its own dedicated resources. The
partitioning includes SMs and the entire memory system,
including the on-chip crossbar ports, L2 cache banks, memory
controllers, and DRAM address buses, effectively eliminating
performance interference between different applications. Each
GPU instance contains at least one GPU Processing Cluster
(GPC) along with a designated portion of the GPU’s memory.
The current setup of MIG can support up to seven distinct
instances, offering predefined configurations including 1g, 2g,
3g, 4g, and 7g, where ‘g’ indicates a portion of the total
GPU compute resources. For instance, the smallest configuration available is 1g.5gb, providing 1/7 of the Streaming
Multiprocessors (SMs) and 5 GB of GPU memory. However,
configurations for 5g and 6g are not available.
The TLB organization in MIG is shown in Figure 2.
Specifically, MIG partitions the L1 and L2 TLBs along with
the GPCs: the L1 TLB is shared between the two SMs within
each Texture Processing Cluster (TPC), and the L2 TLB is
shared across the SMs of a GPC. However, interestingly,
prior work [63] reveals that the L3 TLB in today’s GPUs

