Accelerating Zero-Knowledge Proofs Through
Hardware-Algorithm Co-Design
Nikola Samardzic*

Simon Langowski*

Srinivas Devadas

Daniel Sanchez

MIT CSAIL
nsamar@csail.mit.edu

MIT CSAIL
slangows@mit.edu

MIT CSAIL
devadas@mit.edu

MIT CSAIL
sanchez@csail.mit.edu

"
𝑓 ⋅,⋅ , 𝒙

Legend
Verifier

𝑓 ⋅,⋅ : statement
): public input
𝒙
) private input
𝒘:
(i.e., private witness)

Verifier
Verifier

Small proof that
! s.t.
prover has 𝒘
!, 𝒘
! = 0.
𝑓 𝒙

Trust barrier

Abstract—Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) are a cryptographic
tool that enables one party (a prover) to prove to another (a
verifier) that a statement is true, without requiring the prover to
disclose any data to the verifier. ZKPs have many use cases,
such as letting clients delegate computation to servers with
cryptographic correctness guarantees, while enabling the server
to use secret data in these computations. ZKP applications
span verifiable machine learning (ML) and databases, online
auctions, electronic voting, and blockchains. While ZKPs are
already widely used in blockchains, the prohibitive costs of proof
generation limit them to proving very simple computations.
We present a novel accelerator, NoCap, that leverages hardware-algorithm co-design to achieve transformative
speedups. NoCap generates proofs 586× faster than a 32-core
CPU, and 41× faster than PipeZK, a state-of-the-art ZKP
accelerator. We leverage recent algorithmic developments to
achieve these speedups: we identify and combine two recent hashbased ZKP algorithms, Orion and Spartan, which have similar
performance on CPUs to the ZKPs targeted by prior accelerators,
but are much more amenable to hardware acceleration. Though
these algorithms result in larger proofs, we show that the endto-end speedups (including prover time, proof transmission, and
verification time) more than justify this size increase.
We contribute a novel hardware organization to exploit these
acceleration opportunities: NoCap is a programmable vector
processor with functional units tailored to the needs of hash-based
ZKPs. We also contribute a co-designed implementation of the
Spartan+Orion ZKP tailored to accelerators, with optimizations
that improve parallelism and reduce memory traffic. As a result,
NoCap achieves speedups that enable new use cases for ZKP.
Index Terms—Zero-Knowledge Proofs, hardware acceleration,
verifiable computation

"
𝒘
Prover

ZKP Accelerator

Fig. 1: ZKPs allow a prover to convince other parties, called
verifiers, of a statement f , possibly requiring private input w
from the prover.

correctly [84]. Further, the prover can convince the verifier that
the prover has data that produces a specific output; for example,
a server can use ZKPs to prove to clients that a (secret) machine
learning model achieves a certain accuracy [90]. Other ZKP
applications include electronic voting [94], online auctions [33],
static program verification [30], blockchains [2, 4, 56, 62, 89],
and cryptocurrencies.
ZKPs currently see limited use, e.g., for simple computations
in blockchains, as their performance overheads greatly limit
their applicability to the above areas. ZKPs suffer from
extremely slow proof generation: in commonly used ZKPs,
producing a proof for a given computation is 5–6 orders of
magnitude slower than executing the computation itself when
using a CPU, which limits ZKPs to verifying very simple
computations. This has sparked efforts to accelerate proof
generation, including using ASICs [92], FPGAs [5, 41, 79],
and GPUs [52]. Recently, over $100M has been invested to
develop and deploy ZKP accelerators [26, 77, 79, 88].
I. I NTRODUCTION
A full-system approach to accelerate ZKPs: In this paper,
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) are an emerging family of we present a novel ZKP accelerator that achieves transformative
cryptographic tools that enables one party (prover) to prove speedups, 586× over a 32-core CPU and 41× over prior ZKP
to other parties (verifiers) that a statement is true, without accelerators, enabling new ZKP use cases.
To achieve these high speedups, we take an end-to-end
requiring the prover to disclose any data to verifiers. Fig. 1
illustrates how ZKPs work. The prover generates a small proof systems design approach: instead of focusing on ZKP schemes
of a statement and publishes it. Any verifier can download the accelerated by prior work, we identify a new family of ZKP
proof and verify the statement cheaply. The prover can also schemes that make better tradeoffs between prover and verifier
restrict the proof so that it is only verifiable by a single verifier. costs for many ZKP applications.
Concretely, prior work is focused on accelerating ZKPs
ZKPs are a powerful tool with myriad applications. The
prover can convince the verifier that an arbitrary computation based on elliptic-curve cryptography, like Groth16 [39]. These
has been performed correctly; for example, clients can delegate schemes produce tiny proofs (hundreds of bytes) that are cheap
computation to a server (e.g., transactions on a shared database), to verify, but proof generation is hard to accelerate. In particular,
and the server can prove that it executed the clients’ computation elliptic-curve operations are so computationally demanding
that speedups are limited, even with hardware acceleration. For
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
example, PipeZK [92], the state-of-the-art ASIC accelerator,

uses Groth16 and outperforms a CPU by 5–15×. These tions/second. NoCap can achieve 1-second transaction latency
speedups are insufficient to counter the high overheads of ZKPs. with a throughput of 1,142 transactions/second (Sec. VIII).
We identify that combining Spartan [70] and Orion [86]—two
As NoCap allows for proofs about much larger programs,
recently proposed hash-based ZKP components—makes for we can enable additional applications in privacy-preserving
proof generation that performs similarly on a CPU but is much data analysis. For example, one can prove that differentiallymore amenable to acceleration. However, this comes at the private (DP) training was carried out correctly [72], reducing
expense of larger proofs (megabytes). We show that for many the required 100 hours of computation to less than 30 minutes.
applications, i.e., those where each proof is verified by one or Other examples include showing that a machine learning model
a few clients, trading prover speed for proof size is the right was applied to the data correctly [24, 50, 83]. As demand for
tradeoff (Sec. III).
even larger use cases grows, acceleration of ZKPs will become
NoCap accelerator: Based on these insights, we design increasingly important.
In summary, our key contributions are:
NoCap,1 an accelerator for hash-based ZKPs. Proof generation
• The observation that a combination of two recent ZKP
comprises several complex algorithms that continue to evolve,
primitives, Spartan and Orion, enable ZKPs with very high
so we build a programmable architecture that accelerates the
degrees of hardware acceleration (Sec. III).
primitive operations shared by these components.
• A novel programmable accelerator, NoCap, that accelerates
NoCap is a vector processor with functional units tailored to
the key primitives used by these ZKPs (Sec. IV).
the primitives used by ZKPs, including modular arithmetic on
• A high-performance implementation of Spartan+Orion
64-bit integers, number-theoretic transforms (NTTs), cryptotargeting NoCap that achieves high data reuse, high
graphic hashing, and shuffles. NoCap features high-bandwidth
arithmetic intensity, and scales to proofs for very large
memory and an on-chip banked register file. We synthesize
programs (Sec. V).
NoCap’s building blocks using 14nm technology, and find that
• A detailed synthesis and performance-based evaluation of
a chip with modest area, 46 mm2 , and power, 62 W, suffices
NoCap, showing transformative speedups using an ASIC
to achieve high performance.
with modest cost (Sec. VI–Sec. VIII).
We evaluate NoCap on a wide range of applications. Our
algorithm-accelerator co-design yields high speedups: NoCap
II. BACKGROUND
is gmean 586× faster than a 32-core CPU that has significantly
As Fig. 1 shows, ZKP is a cryptographic tool that allows a
higher area and power budgets, and is 41× faster than PipeZK.
These transformative speedups enable new applications, such prover to convince a verifier that for a given function f (·, ·) and
public input x̄, the prover knows a private input (a.k.a., witness)
as real-time verifiable databases.
Because all hash-based schemes build on the same primitives, w̄, such that f (x̄, w̄) = 0 (this can be trivially generalized to
NoCap is able to accelerate all hash-based ZKPs. To our prove that a function evaluates to an arbitrary value).
Functions f verified by ZKPs are arithmetic circuits. These
knowledge, it is the first hash-based ZKP accelerator.
are
directed acyclic graphs where each node is an addition or
NoCap enables new use cases for ZKPs: NoCap’s high
multiplication
(modulo some prime) and each edge (also called
speedups broaden the use cases for ZKPs. As a concrete
wire
value)
represents
an intermediate value between operations.
example, consider secure photo modification. A camera can
For
example,
the
arithmetic
circuit in Fig. 2 (left) implements
create a (hardware) signed image to verify its authenticity.
the
function
f
(x̄,
w̄)
=
x
+
w 0 + x1 ∗ w 1 + x1 ∗ w 1 ∗ w 2 .
0
Suppose a user wants to modify this image in some allowable
The
most
studied
and
widely
used of ZKPs are zkway, e.g., cropping, with another photo editing program. The
SNARKs
[17]
(zero-knowledge,
succinct,
non-interactive
user can then prove that the cropped image is a descendant of
arguments
of
knowledge),
because
they
have
attractive
propthe original, without revealing the original, and has not been
erties:
(1)
zero-knowledge
means
the
verifier
does
not
learn
modified further. For a 256KB image, this would take over 12
anything
about
the
private
witness
w̄;
(2)
succinctness
means
minutes to prove on a CPU, but with NoCap a proof takes just
that proof size and verifier compute costs are small (regardless
over a second, and verification takes only 0.2 seconds.
NoCap also enables real-time verified databases. The Lit- of the complexity of f ), (3) non-interactive means a verifier
mus [84] cryptographically verified database achieves high and prover need not communicate to check and generate the
throughput (thousands of transactions per second), but does proof. For these reasons, we focus on accelerating zk-SNARKs.
so by batching over 80 thousand transactions at a time and A. zk-SNARK structure and design space
using pipelined provers, which causes very high verification
Fig. 2 shows the general structure of a common class of
latencies, over 100 seconds. Though verification cost is small,
zk-SNARKs.
zk-SNARKs generate proofs by reducing the task
a 100-second latency is untenable for many use cases, like
of
proving
f
(x̄,
w̄) = 0 for an arbitrarily complex f (e.g., the
financial transactions. Reducing batch size to achieve 1-second
circuit
on
the
left
of Fig. 2) into one of proving the correctness
transaction latency (including computation, proof generation,
of
one
or
a
few
polynomial
evaluations.
and verification) reduces Litmus’s throughput to only 2 transacAs Fig. 2 shows, there are three main steps in doing this:
First, the prover constructs a system of equations whose
1 NoCap is so named because it erases the prover’s performance cap in
ZKPs, and after the slang phrase, as ZKPs prevent the server from lying.
correctness implies that f (x̄, w̄) = 0 ( 1 in Fig. 2). This

