SambaNova SN40L: Scaling the AI Memory Wall
with Dataflow and Composition of Experts
Raghu Prabhakar

Darshan Gandhi

Yun Du

Mingran Wang

Xiangyu Song

Kejie Zhang

Tianren Gao

Angela Wang

Xiaoyan Li

Yongning Sheng

Joshua Brot

Denis Sokolov

Apurv Vivek

Calvin Leung

Arjun Sabnis

arXiv:2405.07518v2 [cs.AR] 5 Nov 2024

Ram Sivaramakrishnan

Mark Luttrell
Urmish Thakker

Jiayu Bai

Tuowen Zhao

Mark Gottscho

David Jackson

Manish K. Shah

Zhengyu Chen

Kaizhao Liang

Swayambhoo Jain

Dawei Huang

Sumti Jairath

Kevin J. Brown

Kunle Olukotun

SambaNova Systems, Inc.
first.last@sambanova.ai

Abstract—Monolithic large language models (LLMs) like
GPT-4 have paved the way for modern generative AI
applications. Training, serving, and maintaining monolithic
LLMs at scale, however, remains prohibitively expensive
and challenging. The disproportionate increase in computeto-memory ratio of modern AI accelerators have created a
memory wall, necessitating new methods to deploy AI. Recent
research has shown that a composition of many smaller expert
models, each with several orders of magnitude fewer parameters,
can match or exceed the capabilities of monolithic LLMs.
Composition of Experts (CoE) is a modular approach that lowers
the cost and complexity of training and serving. However, this
approach presents two key challenges when using conventional
hardware: (1) without fused operations, smaller models have
lower operational intensity, which makes high utilization more
challenging to achieve; and (2) hosting a large number of models
can be either prohibitively expensive or slow when dynamically
switching between them.
In this paper, we describe how combining CoE, streaming
dataflow, and a three-tier memory system scales the AI memory
wall. We describe Samba-CoE, a CoE system with 150 experts
and a trillion total parameters. We deploy Samba-CoE on the
SambaNova SN40L Reconfigurable Dataflow Unit (RDU) – a
commercial dataflow accelerator architecture that has been codesigned for enterprise inference and training applications. The
chip introduces a new three-tier memory system with on-chip
distributed SRAM, on-package HBM, and off-package DDR
DRAM. A dedicated inter-RDU network enables scaling up and
out over multiple sockets. We demonstrate speedups ranging from
2× to 13× on various benchmarks running on eight RDU sockets
compared with an unfused baseline. We show that for CoE
inference deployments, the 8-socket RDU Node reduces machine
footprint by up to 19×, speeds up model switching time by 15×
to 31×, and achieves an overall speedup of 3.7× over a DGX
H100 and 6.6× over a DGX A100.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in the training and inference of large
language models (LLMs) has taken the world by storm. State-

of-the-art generative AI/ML applications like ChatGPT [1]
and Gemini [2] are built on top of monolithic LLMs that
can have billions or trillions of parameters. They are trained
with curated datasets that consist of trillions of tokens scraped
from the web. However, training and serving a state-ofthe-art monolithic LLM is both an extraordinarily expensive
affair and a complex systems engineering challenge. Training
requires building and operating a supercomputer composed of
thousands of hosts, purpose-built networks, power and cooling
infrastructure, and thousands of accelerators – typically
GPUs [3], [4] or TPUs [5]–[8]. The prohibitive cost and
expertise required to train and serve 100s of billions of
parameters put state-of-the-art AI capabilities out of reach
for many academic researchers and smaller organizations,
especially when on-premise deployments are needed. For
instance, compute costs to train OpenAI’s GPT-4 is estimated
to be $78 million USD, and Google’s Gemini Ultra to be $191
million USD [9]. Building and deploying large monolithic
models may not be sustainable for hyperscalers [10] or any
organization needing capable AI models continuously trained
and updated on their data [11]–[13]. Finally, systems that
cater to monolothic models have scaled compute TFLOPs
much faster than memory bandwidth and capacity, creating the
memory wall [14] where the memory system can no longer
feed the compute efficiently.
The ML research community has responded with
ecosystems of much smaller, modular models that are
just as capable, but are cheaper and easier to train and
serve [15]–[18]. Smaller models like the 8B-parameter Llama
3.1 [19], Llama2 [20], and Mistral 7B [21] are often adequate.
They might not match the performance of larger models over a
general suite of tasks, but smaller models can deliver superior
accuracy on a narrower set of specialized tasks for which they

