vTrain: A Simulation Framework for Evaluating Cost-effective
and Compute-optimal Large Language Model Training
Jehyeon Bang†

Yujeong Choi†

Myeongwoo Kim∗

Yongdeok Kim∗

Minsoo Rhu†

† KAIST

School of Electrical Engineering
{jehyeon.bang, yjchoi0606, mrhu}@kaist.ac.kr

{k.myeong-woo, yd.mlg.kim}@samsung.com

Abstract—As large language models (LLMs) become
widespread in various application domains, a critical challenge
the AI community is facing is how to train these large AI
models in a cost-effective manner. Existing LLM training plans
typically employ a heuristic based parallel training strategy
which is based on empirical observations rather than grounded
upon a thorough examination of the search space of LLM
parallelization. Such limitation renders existing systems to leave
significant performance left on the table, wasting millions of
dollars worth of training cost. This paper presents our profilingdriven simulator called vTrain, providing AI practitioners a
fast yet accurate software framework to determine an efficient
and cost-effective LLM training system configuration. We
demonstrate vTrain’s practicality through several case studies,
e.g., effectively evaluating optimal training parallelization
strategies that balances training time and its associated training
cost, efficient multi-tenant GPU cluster schedulers targeting
multiple LLM training jobs, and determining a compute-optimal
LLM model architecture given a fixed compute budget.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Transformer-based [73] large language models (LLMs) like
ChatGPT [50], Gemini [70], LLaMA [72], and PaLM [9] are
taking the world by storm. Driven by the rapidly increasing
model parameter size as well as training token size, these
large autoregressive AI models have demonstrated phenomenal
performance on many tasks using a variety of evaluation
protocols such as zero-shot, few-shot, and fine-tuning [4].
Unfortunately, a critical challenge that the AI community is
facing is how to train these LLMs in a cost-effective manner.
State-of-the-art LLMs already reached hundreds of billions of
parameters requiring trillions of tokens for training [18]. Such
massive compute requirements for training LLMs rendered the
latest AI training cluster to be provisioned with ExaFLOPS
scale computational throughput using tens of thousands of
GPUs [32], [41]. Because of the enormous compute budget
required for training LLMs, it is practically only possible to
train these models “once” (e.g., training LLMs like ChatGPT
incurs tens of millions of dollars [46], [67]). Consequently,
accurately determining the hyperparameters of both the AI
training system as well as the LLM model architecture (e.g.,
number of GPUs, intra-/inter-node parallelization and communication mechanisms, LLM model parameter size, and total

60

Training time
(days)

arXiv:2312.12391v2 [cs.LG] 10 Sep 2024

∗ Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology

40
20
0

30

40

50

60

70

GPU compute utilization (%)

Fig. 1: Wall clock training time of GPT-3 (175B parameters) as a
function of GPU compute utilization, assuming 1,024 NVIDIA A100
GPUs are used for training. GPU compute utilization refers to the
achieved FLOPS relative to the maximum FLOPS. Training time is
primarily determined by dividing up “the total number of FLOPs to
train an LLM” with “the aggregate, effective FLOPS available for
training across the 1,024 A100 GPUs”. We estimate training time by
changing the effective FLOPS of A100 GPUs and derive the training
cost based on AWS EC2 P4d GPU instance pricing information [2].

number of tokens to train) becomes critical to optimize not
only the LLM training time but more crucially the monetary
training “cost” associated with it.
Given this landscape, a rich set of prior literature explored
various LLM parallelization and communication mechanism
specifically targeting transformer-based language models [27],
[40], [66], [67]. A popular way of parallelizing autoregressive
LLMs today is to employ tensor parallelism [66] for intranode training while combining data parallelism and pipeline
parallelism [21], [37] for inter-node training (Section II-B).
Such heuristic based training parallelization strategies have
so far proven successful in training conventional LLMs with
reasonable efficiency. Nonetheless, the principles behind these
heuristic based parallelization are typically founded upon
empirical observations or intuitive design choices rather than
being grounded upon a rigorous evaluation of the design
space of LLM parallelization. This leads to suboptimal GPU
utilization which leaves significant performance left on the
table (Section V-A). In Figure 1, we show the change in LLM
training time as a function of GPU’s compute utilization when
training GPT-3 (175B) using 1,024 A100 GPUs. Notice how
the training time is increased by 8 days when the average GPU
compute utilization is merely degraded by 10% (from 50%
to 40%), resulting in an additional training cost of millions
of dollars. Unfortunately, finding the most optimal and cost-

