arXiv:2407.16038v1 [cs.CR] 22 Jul 2024

MINT: Securely Mitigating Rowhammer
with a Minimalist In-DRAM Tracker
Moinuddin Qureshi

Salman Qazi

Aamer Jaleel

Georgia Tech
moin@gatech.edu

Google
sqazi@google.com

NVIDIA
ajaleel@nvidia.com

Abstract—This paper investigates secure low-cost in-DRAM
trackers for mitigating Rowhammer (RH). In-DRAM solutions
have the advantage that they can solve the RH problem within
the DRAM chip, without relying on other parts of the system.
However, in-DRAM mitigation suffers from two key challenges:
First, the mitigations are synchronized with refresh, which means
we cannot mitigate at arbitrary times. Second, the SRAM area
available for aggressor tracking is severely limited, to only a
few bytes. Existing low-cost in-DRAM trackers (such as TRR)
have been broken by well-crafted access patterns, whereas
prior counter-based schemes require impractical overheads of
hundreds or thousands of entries per bank. The goal of our
paper is to develop an ultra low-cost secure in-DRAM tracker.
Our solution is based on a simple observation: if only one
row can be mitigated at refresh, then we should ideally need to
track only one row. We propose a Minimalist In-DRAM Tracker
(MINT), which provides secure mitigation with just a single entry.
Unlike prior trackers that decide the row to be mitigated based
on the past behavior (select based on activation counts) or solely
based on the current activation (select with some probability),
MINT decides which row in the future will get mitigated. At
each refresh, MINT probabilistically decides which activation in
the upcoming interval will be selected for mitigation at the next
refresh. MINT provides guaranteed protection against classic
single and double-sided attacks. We also derive the minimum
RH threshold (MinTRH) tolerated by MINT across all patterns.
MINT has a MinTRH of 1482 which can be lowered to 356 with
RFM. The MinTRH of MINT is lower than a prior counter-based
design with 677 entries per bank, and is within 2x of the MinTRH
of an idealized design that stores one-counter-per-row. We also
analyze the impact of refresh postponement on the MinTRH of
low-cost in-DRAM trackers, and propose an efficient solution to
make such trackers compatible with refresh postponement.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Rowhammer (RH) is a data-disturbance error that occurs
when rapid activations of a DRAM row causes bit-flips in
neighboring rows [22]. Rowhammer is a serious security
threat, as it gives an attacker a powerful tool to flip bits in
protected data structures, such as page tables, which can result
in privilege escalation [2], [4], [7]–[9], [38], [41] and breach
of confidentiality [24]. The RH problem has been difficult
to solve, because the Rowhammer Threshold (TRH), which
is the number of activations required to induce a bit-flip,
has continued to reduce with successive DRAM generations,
reducing from 140K [22] to about 4.8K [18] in the last decade.
Thus, Rowhammer solutions must scale to low TRH.
Typical hardware-based mitigation for RH relies on a
tracking mechanism to identify the aggressor rows (i.e., the
rows that get activated repeatedly) and issue a refresh to the
neighboring victim rows [10]. Hardware-based RH mitigation

can be deployed at the Memory-Controller (MC) or within
the DRAM chip (in-DRAM). The in-DRAM approach has
the advantage that it can solve the RH problem transparently
within the DRAM chip without relying on changes to other
parts of the system. The in-DRAM approach also has the
advantage that memory vendors can tune their mitigation
solution to target the TRH observed in their chips. This work
focuses on a low-cost in-DRAM RH mitigation.
In-DRAM RH mitigation suffers from two key constraints.
First, the RH mitigation is performed transparently within the
refresh (REF) operation. For example, for DDR5, the REF
operation occurs every 3.9 microseconds, and the DRAM chip
can steal some of the time reserved for REF for performing
RH mitigation (refresh the victim rows of a selected aggressor
row). It is not possible for the DRAM chips to sometimes take
longer to do REF if there are more aggressor rows, as this
would violate the deterministic timing guarantees of DDR5.
This restriction means that it is not enough to track aggressor
rows, but we must spread the mitigation of aggressor rows over
as many REF periods, as we cannot support bursty mitigation.
Second, the SRAM budget available for tracking aggressor
rows is quite small (often few bytes per bank) and this budget
is insufficient for tracking all the aggressor rows. For example,
DDR4 devices contain Targeted Row Refresh (TRR) tracker
containing 1-30 entries [10], however, such trackers have
been defeated with attack patterns such as TRRespass [7] and
Blacksmith [13]. Thus, systems continue to be prone to RH
attacks even in the presence of such deployed mitigations.
Designing secure low-cost in-DRAM trackers has proven
to be a significant challenge. The recent solutions from industry have not proved to be secure either. For example, the
DSAC [11] tracker from Samsung is vulnerable to Blacksmith
patterns (when designed for a TRH of 2K, DSAC results in 9K
unmitigated activations on an aggressor row with Blacksmith).
Similarly, the PAT [21] tracker from Hynix claims 30% lower
failure rate than TRR (however, as TRR can be broken within
a few minutes, PAT can also be broken within a few minutes).
Prior studies, such as ProTRR [28] and Mithril [19], bound
the minimum number of tracking entries required to deterministically and securely mitigate a given TRH. These studies
show that an optimal number of entries in the tracker would
be several thousand per bank for current TRH (e.g. 1400
entries for TRH of 2K). This SRAM overhead is prohibitively
large for practical adoption in DRAM chips. Any tracker with
number of entries below the optimal will always suffer from
a non-zero probability of failure [28].

0

Entries Per Bank 100s 1000s
10
Type-1: Select
based on past

Security

High

Low

GOAL
Optimal Trackers
(Mithril, ProTRR)

Type-3: Select one
in the future

Type-2: Select based
only on present

E.g. Counter

Y

X
R
E
F

Low-Cost
Trackers (TRR,
DSAC,PAT)

X
IID-Rand
Selection
InDRAM-PARA

R
E
F

R
E
F

Y
U-Rand
Selection

R
E
F

MINT (Our Proposal)

Fig. 1. (a) Our goal is to develop secure low-cost trackers. (b) In-DRAM RH mitigation is performed at REF and the tracker decides which row to mitigate.
Trackers can be categorized into three types (1) past-centric, such as counter-based tracking (2) present-centric, such as selecting the currently activated row
with some probability (3) future-centric, our design, which decides at each REF which row will be picked for mitigation in the upcoming interval.

Figure 1 (a) provides an overview of the landscape of inDRAM trackers. Current in-DRAM trackers are either insecure
or incur a prohibitively high-cost. The goal of our paper is
to develop a low-cost secure in-DRAM tracker. Our solution
is based on a simple insight: If in-DRAM mitigation is
limited to mitigating at-most one aggressor row per REF,
ideally we should need a tracker with only a single-entry
(that identifies the aggressor row to be mitigated). We develop
a classification of in-DRAM trackers that helps in guiding
our solution. Figure 1 (b) shows an overview of in-DRAM
rowhammer mitigation. A REF occurs at each tREFI interval
and there are activations between REF. At each REF, one
aggressor row is selected for mitigation. Depending on how
this selection is made, we can classify the in-DRAM trackers
into three types. First, past-centric, which makes the selection
decision based on past behavior. For example, counter-based
schemes (ProTRR and Mithril) select a row with the maximum
counter value. Such trackers need a large amount of storage.
Second, present-centric, which makes the selection decision
probabilistically based only on the currently activated row.
For example, a PARA [22] like in-DRAM scheme would
select each activated row with an Independent and Identically
Distributed (IID) probability of p. If selected, the row address
is stored in a single-entry tracker for getting mitigated at the
next REF. The problem with such an InDRAM-PARA design is
that a selected row can be over-written before reaching REF by
another selected row and thus miss the chance of mitigation.
Furthermore, even if the same row gets activated throughout
the tREFI interval, there is still a non-negligible likelihood
that the row will still not be selected for mitigation. Ideally,
we want a single-entry tracker that avoids both problems
of InDRAM-PARA (no over-writing a selected entry and
guaranteed selection of one row in tREFI). The Minimum TRH
(MinTRH) tolerated by the InDRAM-PARA is 7.6K.

is given a sequence number, and when this number reaches
SAN, the row is designated for mitigation at next REF.
By design, MINT avoids over-writing the selection. Secondly, MINT guarantees selection of one row (from M activations), thus it provides guaranteed protection against classic
single-sided and double-sided attacks, if such attacks are done
continuously. We analyze the worst-case pattern for MINT
for determining the MinTRH. We also analyze Transitive
Attacks [23] that leverage victim refresh to cause RH failures
in a distant row. Our analysis shows that MINT has a MinTRH
of 2800 (MinTRH-D of 1400 for double-sided). The MinTRH
of MINT is similar to Mithril [19] with 677 entries per bank.
DDR5 allows the postponement of up-to four REF operations. Delayed refreshes are especially problematic for lowcost trackers as they track limited entries, which may get
dislodged (without mitigation). We analyze the impact of delayed refreshes on low-cost trackers and propose a generalized
solution, the Delayed Mitigation Queue (DMQ), that enable
low-cost trackers to operate with REF postponement. With
DMQ, the MinTRH-D of MINT is 1482.
The threshold tolerated by MINT (with support for refresh
postponement) is lower than a Mithril tracker with 677entries per bank, and is within 2x of an idealized tracker
that has one counter per row. Thus, our proposal bounds the
gap between the lowest-cost tracker (single-entry) and an
idealized tracker (per-row counters) to a narrow range (2x).
Overall, this paper makes the following contributions:
1) We propose Minimalist In-DRAM Tracker (MINT) that
provides secure RH mitigation with a single entry.
2) We show that MINT tolerates a MinTRH of 2800
(MinTRH-D 1400), similar to a 677-entry tracker.
3) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to
study the impact of refresh postponement on low-cost
trackers. We propose Delayed Mitigation Queue (DMQ)
to enable low-cost tracking with refresh postponement.
MINT+DMQ has a MinTRH-D of 1482.

We propose a Minimalist In-DRAM Tracker (MINT) that
provides secure RH mitigation with a single-entry. MINT
offers a new category, the third-type, future-centric. Let there
be a maximum of M activations in tREFI. At each REF,
MINT decides which of the M activations in the upcoming
interval should be selected for mitigation at the next REF.
MINT performs this selection using a Uniform Random (URAND) choice of all 1 to M positions. This position is stored in
a Selected Activation Number (SAN). Each activation in tREFI

4) We combine MINT with the RFM feature of DDR5 to
to obtain a MinTRH-D as low as 356.
The storage overhead of MINT is four bytes (per bank) and
the performance and power overheads are negligibly small.

2

