Cambricon-LLM: A Chiplet-Based Hybrid
Architecture for On-Device Inference of 70B LLM
Zhongkai Yu1,2,† , Shengwen Liang1,† , Tianyun Ma3 , Yunke Cai1,2 , Ziyuan Nan1,2 , Di Huang1 , Xinkai Song1 ,
Yifan Hao1 , Jie Zhang4 , Tian Zhi1 , Yongwei Zhao1 , Zidong Du1,5 , Xing Hu1,5,∗ , Qi Guo1 , Tianshi Chen6

arXiv:2409.15654v1 [cs.AR] 24 Sep 2024

1

SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Beijing, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies
6
Cambricon Technologies Co., Ltd., China
Emails: {yuzhongkai21s, liangshengwen, caiyunke21e, nanziyuan21s, huangdi, songxinkai, haoyifan, zhitian, zhaoyongwei,
duzidong, huxing, guoqi}@ict.ac.cn, mty21@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiez@pku.edu.cn, tchen@cambricon.com
Abstract—Deploying advanced large language models on edge
devices, such as smartphones and robotics, is a growing trend that
enhances user data privacy and network connectivity resilience
while preserving intelligent capabilities. However, such a task
exhibits single-batch computing with incredibly low arithmetic
intensity, which poses the significant challenges of huge memory
footprint and bandwidth demands on limited edge resources.
To address these issues, we introduce Cambricon-LLM, a
chiplet-based hybrid architecture with NPU and a dedicated
NAND flash chip to enable efficient on-device inference of 70B
LLMs. Such a hybrid architecture utilizes both the high computing capability of NPU and the data capacity of the NAND flash
chip, with the proposed hardware-tiling strategy that minimizes
the data movement overhead between NPU and NAND flash chip.
Specifically, the NAND flash chip, enhanced by our innovative inflash computing and on-die ECC techniques, excels at performing
precise lightweight on-die processing. Simultaneously, the NPU
collaborates with the flash chip for matrix operations and
handles special function computations beyond the flash’s on-die
processing capabilities. Overall, Cambricon-LLM enables the
on-device inference of 70B LLMs at a speed of 3.44 token/s,
and 7B LLMs at a speed of 36.34 token/s, which is over 22×
to 45× faster than existing flash-offloading technologies, showing
the potentiality of deploying powerful LLMs in edge devices.
Index Terms—In-Flash Computing; Large Language Model
Accelerator; Robotic Accelerator

I. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a variety of tasks, suggesting their
potential to reshape labor markets and boost human productivity. As such potential unfolds, it is increasingly important
to facilitate private LLM inferences on edge devices, such
as robotics or even smartphones. By ensuring that everyone
possesses a personalized LLM agent, we not only harness
the transformative power of LLM agents but also cater to
fundamental needs of privacy, customization, and accessibility.
However, the deployment of personal LLM agents on edge
devices, where the predominant task type is single-batch
∗ Corresponding author
† Equal contribution

computing, presents unique challenges compared to traditional
LLM inference processes in the cloud. This mode of inference
does not leverage inter-batch parallelism, exacerbating memory
bandwidth bottlenecks and further restricting the deployment
of LLMs on edge devices. Specifically, personal LLM deployment faced the following challenges:
• Huge memory footprint on limited edge resources.
Research has consistently demonstrated that LLMs with a
greater number of parameters exhibit enhanced emergent capabilities and superior performance [78]. However, the extensive parameter size presents considerable challenges in terms
of memory, as exemplified by the Llama-70B model under
INT8 quantization, which demands 70GB of memory. This
requirement far exceeds the capacity of typical smartphone
DRAMs. Furthermore, large parameter sizes inevitably lead
to intensive data movement, which is the primary source of
energy consumption during LLM single-batch inference on
edge devices. Notably, the energy cost associated with moving
a single bit of data is estimated to be 100-500× greater than
that required for computation [21], [48], [51], [56].
• Substantial bandwidth demand due to single-batch’s
incredibly low arithmetic intensity. Arithmetic Intensity is
defined as the ratio of the computational operations to the
amount of data transferred between slow and fast memory. A
Low arithmetic intensity suggests that the program is memorybound. Unfortunately, single-batch LLM inference holds an
unprecedentedly low arithmetic intensity of 2 under INT8
quantization. As shown in Figure 1(a), the arithmetic intensity
of LLM single-batch inference is 30× to 100× lower than that
of other AI algorithms like DLRM [49], BERT [14] and VGG
[61], and over 100× lower than the capabilities of hardware,
such as Apple A16, NVIDIA A100 and NVIDIA Jetson Orin.
This gap leads to extremely low hardware utilization due to
the pronounced memory access bottlenecks and an extremely
high demand for bandwidth.
To address the issue of the huge memory footprint, several works such as FlexGen [60] and DeepSpeed [54] have
proposed offloading LLMs to flash-based SSDs. However, this

10000
1000
100
10
1

Reduction Ratio

Arithmetic Intensity
(OP/Byte)

1000

100
10
1

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: (a) Arithmetic Intensity comparison between LLM
and other AI algorithms and (b) Reduction Ratio comparison
between the scenario in LLMFlash and other ISC works.
approach has notable limitations. Firstly, the limited bandwidth
of flash poses a critical bottleneck. For example, offloading the
inference of INT8 quantized Llama2-70B model on UFS 4.0
flash (with 4GB/s bandwidth) yields a theoretical maximum
speed of only 0.06 token/s, far from sufficient for real-time
interactive applications that require a minimum of 3-10 token/s
[5], [25], [27], [50]. Secondly, extra data transfer challenges
the energy budget. Conventional architectures prevent NPUs
from directly accessing data on flash, necessitating an initial
data migration to DRAM, increasing the total data transfer
by over 3×. Given that data movement energy dominates the
total energy consumption, these extra data transfers can result
in significant energy overhead. To meet the huge bandwidth
demands, in-storage computing (ISC) seems to be a potential
solution by exploiting the inherent parallelism of flash. However, even the latest ISC works featuring on-die processing
struggle to accommodate our scenario (e.g. OptimStore [31]
and BeaconGNN [68]). Firstly, the high reduction ratio of
LLM single-batch inference results in suboptimal flash channel
utilization of under 10%. The reduction ratio is defined as the
ratio of input data size to output data size for a given operator.
Taking the Llama2-7B model as an example, where over
95% of computations involve general matrix-vector (GeMV)
multiplications and the smallest matrix size is 4096 × 4096.
After the computation, the result vector is reduced in size by
a factor of 4096 compared to the original weight matrices.
As shown in Figure 1(b), the reduction ratio of LLM singlebatch inference is 100× larger than that observed in other
scenarios discussed in previous ISC research, making them
unsuitable. Secondly, the absence of an on-die error correction
mechanism in OptimStore and BeaconGNN leads to unreliable
outcomes. If LLMs are exposed to flash memory errors
without protection, their accuracy can decrease dramatically
by over 70%.
To this end, we propose Cambricon-LLM, a chiplet-based
hybrid architecture with NPU and an on-die processing flash,
to enable the efficient inference of 70B-LLMs on edge devices.
As shown in Figure 4(a), Cambricon-LLM features a dedicated
flash chip directly connected to the NPU via a chiplet die-todie (D2D) link. This design effectively utilizes the data capacity of the flash chip and the computing capability of NPU, with
the optimized tiling strategy that minimizes the data transfer
between them. The integration of chiplet technology not only
frees up flash from the bandwidth limitations of the UFS 4.0

protocol but also facilitates low-energy data transfers between
NPU and flash, with an integrated flash controller for direct
access from NPU to flash data. Furthermore, the flash memory
within Cambricon-LLM is equipped with on-die computation
capabilities, allowing it to fully explore the inner bandwidth
and reduce the data traffic on the flash channels. In observing
the reliability issue of in-storage computing architecture due to
the frequent flash errors, Cambricon-LLM proposes an ultralightweight on-die Error Correction Unit to protect the outliers
of model weights, thereby ensuring the accuracy of LLM
inference.
To the best of our knowledge, Cambricon-LLM is the first
hybrid architecture to extend NPU with a dedicated flash
to achieve efficient single-batch inference of LLMs on edge
devices. We summarize the contributions of our work as
follows:
• We propose Cambricon-LLM, a novel chiplet-based hybrid architecture that combines an NPU and a specially
designed flash. The flash is equipped with on-die processing capabilities and tailored for edge-based LLM
inference.
• We introduce a hardware-aware tiling strategy that optimally distributes the LLM inference workload between
NPU and flash, therefore fully using the available resources and avoiding flash channel underutilization.
• We propose an efficient on-die error correction algorithm
and a lightweight hardware implementation, which effectively neutralizes the high error rates of flash memory,
preserving the accuracy of LLM inference.
• We employ the SSDsim simulator [26] to evaluate
Cambricon-LLM under various channel and chip configurations. Cambricon-LLM achieves an inference speed of
3.44 tokens/s for 70B LLM, which is over 22× faster than
the baseline.
II. Background
A. LLM Inference
State-of-the-art LLMs [2], [4], [9], [16], [65], [78] are
composed of multi-layered architectures where each layer
corresponds to the decoder part of a Transformer model [66].
These LLMs feature an autoregressive computation pattern,
where each output token is used as the input for generating the
next token, leading to a sequential token generation process.
To minimize redundant computations of this process, the key
and value vectors of previously generated tokens are stored
for use in subsequent token computations, referred to as the
KV cache. The size of the KV cache is proportionally related
to both the batch size and the sequence length. In edge-based
LLM inference, which typically uses a batch size of one, the
KV cache remains small. For example, a 70B parameter LLM
with a sequence length of 1000 would require a KV cache
of around 700MB, a manageable size for the DRAM of edge
devices, thus making on-device inference possible.
The inference process of Large Language Models (LLM) is
divided into two distinct phases:

