This article has been accepted for publication in 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2024. Best paper runner-up (author version).

A Mess of Memory System Benchmarking,
Simulation and Application Profiling
Pouya Esmaili-Dokht∗† , Francesco Sgherzi∗† , Valéria Soldera Girelli∗† , Isaac Boixaderas∗ , Mariana Carmin∗ ,
Alireza Monemi∗ , Adrià Armejach∗† , Estanislao Mercadal∗ , Germán Llort∗ , Petar Radojković∗ , Miquel Moreto∗† ,
Judit Giménez∗† , Xavier Martorell∗† , Eduard Ayguadé∗† , Jesus Labarta∗† , Emanuele Confalonieri‡ ,
Rishabh Dubey‡ , Jason Adlard‡
Barcelona Supercomputing Center∗ , Unversitat Politecnica de Catalunya† , Micron Technology‡
{pouya.esmaili, francesco.sgherzi, valeria.soldera, isaac.boixaderas, mariana.carmin, alireza.monemi, adria.armejach}@bsc.es
{lau.mercadal, german.llort, petar.radojkovic, miquel.moreto, judit, xavier.martorell, eduard.ayguade, jesus.labarta}@bsc.es
{econfalo, rdubeya, jadlard}@micron.com
calculate its service time based on queueing theory or simplified
DDR protocols [13]–[19]. Dedicated cycle-accurate memory
simulators consider detailed memory device sequences and timings [20]–[25]. Application profiling tools determine whether
applications are memory bound based on the memory access
latency [26]–[28], the position in the Roofline model [29], [30]
or the the memory-related portion of the overall CPI stack [31].
Our study argues that the memory system benchmarking,
simulation and application profiling can and should be based
on a unified view of memory system performance. We
provide this view with the Memory stress (Mess) framework
comprised of the Mess benchmark, analytical memory system
simulator and application profiling tool (Figure 1). Mess benchmark (Section II) describes the memory system performance
with a family of bandwidth–latency curves. The benchmark
covers the full range of the memory traffic intensity, from the
unloaded to fully-saturated memory system. It also considers
numerous compositions of read and write operations, plotted
with different shades of blue in Figure 1 (middle). The Mess
benchmark is designed for holistic and detailed memory system
characterization, and it is easily adaptive to different target
platforms. The current benchmark release covers all major CPU
and GPU ISAs: x86, ARM, Power, RISC-V, and NVIDIA’s
Parallel Thread Execution (PTX) [32].
We deploy the Mess benchmark to characterize Intel, AMD,
I. I NTRODUCTION
IBM, Fujitsu and Amazon servers as well as NVIDIA
The importance of the main memory in the overall system’s GPUs with DDR4, DDR5, HBM2 and HBM2E memory
design [1]–[3] drives significant effort for memory system (Section III). We report and discuss a wide range of memory
benchmarking, simulation, and memory-related application system behavior even for the hardware platforms with the same
profiling. Although these three memory performance aspects main memory configuration. These differences are especially
are inherently interrelated, they are analyzed with distinct and pronounced in the high-bandwidth areas which have the greatest
decoupled tools. Memory benchmarks typically report the impact on memory-intensive applications. We also detect and
maximum sustainable memory bandwidth [4]–[6] or perfor- analyze scenarios is which increase of the memory request
mance of the bandwidth-limited application kernels [7]. This rate leads to the degradation of the measured bandwidth.
is sometimes complemented with latency measurements in
We use the Mess benchmark to evaluate memory system
unloaded memory systems [8]–[10] or for a small number simulation of event-based ZSim [15], cycle-accurate gem5 [16]
of memory-usage scenarios [11], [12]. Memory simulators and RTL simulator OpenPiton Metro-MPI [33] (Section IV)
determine the memory system response time for a given traffic. We evaluate different internal memory models and widelySimple simulators model memory with a fixed latency, or used external memory simulators, DRAMsim3 [22], Ramu-

Abstract—The Memory stress (Mess) framework provides a
unified view of the memory system benchmarking, simulation
and application profiling.
The Mess benchmark provides a holistic and detailed memory
system characterization. It is based on hundreds of measurements
that are represented as a family of bandwidth–latency curves.
The benchmark increases the coverage of all the previous tools
and leads to new findings in the behavior of the actual and
simulated memory systems. We deploy the Mess benchmark to
characterize Intel, AMD, IBM, Fujitsu, Amazon and NVIDIA
servers with DDR4, DDR5, HBM2 and HBM2E memory. The
Mess memory simulator uses bandwidth–latency concept for the
memory performance simulation. We integrate Mess with widelyused CPUs simulators enabling modeling of all high-end memory
technologies. The Mess simulator is fast, easy to integrate and
it closely matches the actual system performance. By design, it
enables a quick adoption of new memory technologies in hardware
simulators. Finally, the Mess application profiling positions the
application in the bandwidth–latency space of the target memory
system. This information can be correlated with other application
runtime activities and the source code, leading to a better overall
understanding of the application’s behavior.
The current Mess benchmark release covers all major CPU
and GPU ISAs, x86, ARM, Power, RISC-V, and NVIDIA’s PTX.
We also release as open source the ZSim, gem5 and OpenPiton
Metro-MPI integrated with the Mess simulator for DDR4, DDR5,
Optane, HBM2, HBM2E and CXL memory expanders. The Mess
application profiling is already integrated into a suite of production
HPC performance analysis tools.

© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to
servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00020

