PAPI: Exploiting Dynamic Parallelism
in Large Language Model Decoding with a
Processing-In-Memory-Enabled Computing System
Yintao He1,2 Haiyu Mao3,4 Christina Giannoula5,6,4 Mohammad Sadrosadati4
Juan Gómez-Luna7 Huawei Li1,2 Xiaowei Li1,2 Ying Wang1 Onur Mutlu4

arXiv:2502.15470v2 [cs.AR] 27 Feb 2025

1

SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
ETH Zürich 5 University of Toronto 6 Vector Institute 7 NVIDIA

3

King’s College London

Low execution time of LLM inference is crucial for both user
experience in real-time applications and hardware utilization
efficiency [10]. The LLM decoding phase dominates the execution time in the LLM inference tasks [11, 12]. For instance,
the serial decoding of the GPT-3 175B model is responsible for
96% of the overall execution time when the input and output
lengths are 32 [13]. The impact of LLM decoding on overall
execution time increases as the output length grows, which
is essential for generating more detailed and comprehensive
LLM responses [14].
To improve the performance of the decoding phase, prior
works employ two main parallelism techniques: batching
[15–17] and speculative decoding [18–21]. These techniques
enable the generation of multiple tokens, known as parallel
decoding, in one decoding iteration, to accelerate decoding.
We define the number of decoding tokens that are simultaneously generated as decoding parallelism. Decoding parallelism directly affects the utilization of memory and computation resources. As a result, some kernels in decoding become
compute-bound, while others become memory-bound. Recent
works explore processing-in-memory (PIM) enabled hybrid
designs (i.e., heterogeneous architectures using both PIM units
and computation-centric accelerators, like GPUs) [22–26] to
accelerate the LLM inference process by mapping computebound and memory-bound kernels to computation-centric and
memory-centric accelerators. These works statically characterize LLM decoding kernels and, based on statically-identified
characteristics, schedule different types of kernels to different
computation units (e.g., PIM units and computation-centric
accelerators like GPUs).
To study the effectiveness of static scheduling, we profile the
kernels used in the decoding phase that employs state-of-theart parallelism techniques. We observe that some kernels shift
from being compute-bound to memory-bound (or vice versa)
dynamically in response to variations in decoding parallelism.
This is because decoding parallelism changes dynamically at
runtime. There are three main reasons for these dynamic
changes in decoding parallelism. First, the maximum decoding
parallelism in a computing system is limited by the memory
requirement of requests, which is dependent on request output
lengths and cannot be predicted prior to execution. Second,
the maximum decoding parallelism is also affected by different
user requirements, like quality of service (QoS) [27]. Third,
some parallelism techniques [17, 28] employ dynamic optimization approaches that adjust the configuration of decoding
parallelism (i.e., batch size and speculation length) at runtime
to enhance system performance (see Section 3). We conclude

Large language models (LLMs) are widely used for natural
language understanding and text generation. An LLM model
relies on a time-consuming step called LLM decoding to generate
output tokens. Several prior works focus on improving the performance of LLM decoding using parallelism techniques, such as
batching and speculative decoding. State-of-the-art LLM decoding has both compute-bound and memory-bound kernels. Some
prior works statically identify and map these different kernels
to a heterogeneous architecture consisting of both processing-inmemory (PIM) units and computation-centric accelerators (e.g.,
GPUs). We observe that characteristics of LLM decoding kernels
(e.g., whether or not a kernel is memory-bound) can change dynamically due to parameter changes to meet user and/or system
demands, making (1) static kernel mapping to PIM units and
computation-centric accelerators suboptimal, and (2) one-sizefits-all approach of designing PIM units inefficient due to a large
degree of heterogeneity even in memory-bound kernels.
In this paper, we aim to accelerate LLM decoding while considering the dynamically changing characteristics of the kernels
involved. We propose PAPI (PArallel Decoding with PIM), a
PIM-enabled heterogeneous architecture that exploits dynamic
scheduling of compute-bound or memory-bound kernels to suitable hardware units. PAPI has two key mechanisms: (1) online
kernel characterization to dynamically schedule kernels to the
most suitable hardware units at runtime and (2) a PIM-enabled
heterogeneous computing system that harmoniously orchestrates
both computation-centric processing units (GPU) and hybrid
PIM units with different computing capabilities. Our experimental results on three broadly-used LLMs (i.e., LLaMA-65B, GPT-3
66B, and GPT-3 175B) show that PAPI achieves 1.8× and 11.1×
speedups over a state-of-the-art heterogeneous LLM accelerator (i.e., GPU and PIM) and a state-of-the-art PIM-only LLM
accelerator, respectively.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
success across a wide range of applications, excelling not only
in natural language processing tasks such as code generation [1, 2], question answering [3, 4], but also image [5–7]
and video processing [8]. Efficient LLM inference is crucial to
unlocking the full potential of these models. LLM inference
consists of two phases: prefill and decoding [9]. In the prefill
phase, the LLM model processes all input tokens in a request
to create hidden states for the decoding phase and generate
the first output token. Subsequently, during the conventional
decoding phase, the model generates an output token per decoding iteration.
1

