CINM (Cinnamon): A Compilation Infrastructure for
Heterogeneous Compute In-Memory and Compute
Near-Memory Paradigms
Asif Ali Khan

Hamid Farzaneh

Karl F. A. Friebel

asif_ali.khan@tu-dresden.de

hamid.farzaneh@tu-dresden.de

karl.friebel@tu-dresden.de

TU Dresden

TU Dresden

TU Dresden

Clément Fournier

Lorenzo Chelini

Jeronimo Castrillon

clement.fournier@tu-dresden.de

lorenzo.chelini@intel.com

jeronimo.castrillon@tu-dresden.de

TU Dresden

Intel Switzerland

TU Dresden, ScaDS.AI

Abstract
The rise of data-intensive applications exposed the limitations
of conventional processor-centric von-Neumann architectures
that struggle to meet the off-chip memory bandwidth demand.
Therefore, recent innovations in computer architecture advocate compute-in-memory (CIM) and compute-near-memory
(CNM), non-von-Neumann paradigms achieving orders-ofmagnitude improvements in performance and energy consumption. Despite significant technological breakthroughs in
the last few years, the programmability of these systems is
still a serious challenge. Their programming models are too
low-level and specific to particular system implementations.
Since such future architectures are predicted to be highly
heterogeneous, developing novel compiler abstractions and
frameworks becomes necessary. To this end, we present CINM
(Cinnamon), a first end-to-end compilation flow that leverages
the hierarchical abstractions to generalize over different CIM
and CNM devices and enable device-agnostic and deviceaware optimizations. Cinnamon progressively lowers input
programs and performs optimizations at each level in the
lowering pipeline. To show its efficacy, we evaluate CINM
on a set of benchmarks for a real CNM system (UPMEM)
and the memristors-based CIM accelerators. We show that
Cinnamon, supporting multiple hardware targets, generates
high-performance code comparable to or better than state-ofthe-art implementations.
Keywords: Hardware Emerging architectures, Hardware Emerging tools and methodologies, Hardware Emerging languages
and compilers, Computing methodologies Parallel computing
methodologies
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party
components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the
owner/author(s).
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674189

ACM Reference Format:
Asif Ali Khan, Hamid Farzaneh, Karl F. A. Friebel, Clément Fournier,
Lorenzo Chelini, and Jeronimo Castrillon. 2024. CINM (Cinnamon): A Compilation Infrastructure for Heterogeneous Compute
In-Memory and Compute Near-Memory Paradigms. In 29th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April
27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674189

1

Introduction

Application domains such as social and streaming media,
internet-of-everything, communications and services, and
virtual assistant technologies such as Alexa and Siri are generating data at a break-neck pace, i.e., in the quintillion bytes
range every day. This mind-boggling data volume is mostly
raw and requires processing and analysis [6]. In the conventional processor centric von-Neumann computing paradigm,
these applications quickly hit hard performance and energy
efficiency boundaries as data have to be moved between the
CPU and the memory via a narrow memory channel. On a
mobile device, the data movement alone consumes 62% of
the total system energy [11]. To overcome this data movement
and other challenges associated with the memory subsystem, computer architects are moving to non-Von-Neumann
system models like computing near memory (CNM) [71]
and computing in memory (CIM) [66].1 The idea is to bring
computations closer to the data. In CNM, dedicated CMOS
logic is integrated into the memory chip to diminish the data
movement problem. Conceptually, this tight coupling of the
logic and memory devices can be applied at any level in the
memory hierarchy with various memory technologies. For
DRAM, both planar and stacked structures, such as Micron’s
hybrid memory cube [58], AMD’s and SK Hynix’s high
bandwidth memory [49], and Samsung’s wide IO [42] have
been used to realize CNM systems [71]. While CNM greatly
reduces the data movement on the CPU bus, it still requires
communicating data between the memory and the compute
1CIM and CNM are also referred to as (PIM, IMC) and (NMP, PNM),
respectively, in the literature. We will use CIM and CNM in this paper.

