Abstract—Modern computers heavily rely on caches as one
of the means to achieve higher performance. As a result, cache
management has been the topic of extensive research. Compared
to cache replacement and prefetching, cache indexing has received far less interest over the years. Being in the critical path,
a good cache index function must exhibit a high performance
while having a minimal computational delay. Previous indexing
schemes fall short of these requirements, having either moderate
performance or a prohibitively expensive delay. We propose
E NTROPY I NDEX, an entropy-based cache indexing scheme that
can deliver superior performance while maintaining a minimal
computational cost. E NTROPY I NDEX is based on the idea of
constructing the index function dynamically at runtime using
the address bits with the highest entropy (randomness) to
maximize the balance of the cache access distribution. The
entropy of the address bits is measured by determining which bits
change between two subsequent cache misses. E NTROPY I NDEX
periodically compares the entropy of different bits and selects the
ones that change the most. This dynamic selection scheme allows
E NTROPY I NDEX to adapt to different types of applications.
Our experimental results show that E NTROPY I NDEX outperforms previous indexing schemes both with and without hardware
prefetching. For SPEC 2006, SPEC 2017, PARSEC 3.0 and
GAP benchmarks without prefetching, E NTROPY I NDEX delivers
a geometric mean IPC improvement of 3.39% (with the highest
being 52.2%), compared to a 1.74% improvement of the stateof-the-art index function (P RIME) and a 1.76% improvement of
a commercialized indexing scheme (X ORHASH) over the baseline
power-of-two modulo scheme. With prefetching, E NTROPY I NDEX
is the only indexing scheme with a substantial performance gain
of 1.42% (with the highest being 30.1%), compared to a 0.41%
improvement of P RIME and a 0.49% improvement of X ORHASH
over the same baseline. For non-uniform applications and noprefetching, E NTROPY I NDEX gives an IPC speed up of 5.58%,
compared to a 2.26% speed up of P RIME and a 2.23% speed up
of X ORHASH. For non-uniform applications with prefetching, the
IPC speed up of E NTROPY I NDEX is 2.08%, compared to a 0.35%
speed up of P RIME and a 0.53% speed up of X ORHASH. For CVP
workloads without prefetching, E NTROPY I NDEX delivers a speed
up of 3.04% over the baseline compared to a 1.52% of P RIME
and a 2.04% of X ORHASH. For CVP workloads with prefetching,
E NTROPY I NDEX improves the IPC by 1.60%, compared to 0.63%
of P RIME and 1.07% of X ORHASH.
