2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Sym

The Last-Level B
David Schall
University of Edinburgh*
Edinburgh, UK
david.schall@tum.de

Andreas Sa

Arm Lim
Cambridg
andreas.sandbe

Abstract—Branch prediction is crucial for modern highperformance processors, ensuring efficient execution by anticipating branch outcomes. Despite decades of research, achieving high
prediction accuracy remains challenging, particularly in server
workloads, where large branch working sets and hard-to-predict
branches are prevalent. State-of-the-art predictors, such as the
64KB TAGE-SC-L design, experience high misprediction rates on
server workloads, with 3.6-20% (9.2% on average) of execution
cycles wasted due to mispredictions on a modern server CPU.
While more predictor capacity can reduce mispredictions by up
to 36% in the limit (with infinite storage), realizing meaningful
gains in practice requires hundreds of KBs of storage, which is
infeasible for a latency- and area-sensitive in-core predictor.
This work introduces the Last-Level Branch Predictor (LLBP),
a microarchitectural approach that improves branch prediction accuracy through additional high-capacity storage backing
the baseline TAGE predictor. LLBP leverages the insight that
branches requiring longer histories tend to span multiple program
contexts – notionally, function calls. A given program context,
which can be thought of as a call chain, localizes the branch
prediction state, affording a small number of patterns per context
even for hard-to-predict branches. LLBP predicts upcoming
contexts and prefetches the associated branch metadata into
a small in-core buffer, which is accessed in parallel with the
unmodified TAGE predictor. Our results show that a 512KB
LLBP backing 64KB TAGE-SC-L reduces MPKI by 0.5-25.9%
(avg. 8.9%) over the baseline without LLBP.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Branch prediction is a key enabling technology for today’s
high-performance CPUs. By anticipating branches and predicting their outcome, the branch predictor helps ensure that the
front-end stays on the correct execution path and continues to
fetch instructions even though a given branch may be resolved
tens of cycles after it has been fetched. Improving branch
prediction performance not only can improve the performance
of existing processor designs but also opens the door to more
aggressive microarchitectures with potentially thousands of
instructions in flight [27]. Such large-window processors are
only possible with highly accurate branch prediction since
each misprediction incurs a pipeline flush.
Despite decades of research, achieving high prediction
accuracy remains a challenge, particularly in the server domain [25]. Modern server workloads pose difficulties for
effective prediction due to their large branch working set
and the existence of inherently hard-to-predict branches [27].
Branches that are difficult to predict may require the predictor
to track many instances of such a branch to improve accuracy.
* Now at Technical University Munich

2379-315/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00042

46

