Spindle: Efficient Distributed Training of Multi-Task
Large Models via Wavefront Scheduling
Yujie Wang∗
Peking University
Beijing, China
alfredwang@pku.edu.cn
Shenhan Zhu∗
Peking University
Beijing, China
shenhan.zhu@pku.edu.cn
Fangcheng Fu∗
Peking University
Beijing, China
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn
Xupeng Miao
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
xupeng@purdue.edu
Jie Zhang
Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
wanglin.zj@alibaba-inc.com
Juan Zhu
Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
zhujuan.zj@alibaba-inc.com
Fan Hong
Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
hongfan.hf@alibaba-inc.com
Yong Li
Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
jiufeng.ly@alibaba-inc.com
Bin Cui∗†
Peking University
Beijing, China
bin.cui@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent foundation models are capable of handling multi-
ple tasks and multiple data modalities with the unified base
model structure and several specialized model components.
However, efficient training of such multi-task (MT) multi-
modal (MM) models poses significant system challenges due
to the sophisticated model architecture and the heteroge-
neous workloads of different tasks and modalities.
In this paper, we propose Spindle, a brand new training
system tailored for resource-efficient and high-performance
training of MT MM models via wavefront scheduling. The
key idea of Spindle is to decompose the model execution
into waves and address the joint optimization problem se-
quentially, including both heterogeneity-aware workload
parallelization and dependency-driven execution scheduling.
We build our system and evaluate it on various MT MM mod-
els. Experiments demonstrate the superior performance and
efficiency of Spindle, with speedup ratio up to 71% compared
to state-of-the-art training systems.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has
witnessed a paradigm shift with the advent of large-scale
foundation models [3, 11, 17, 58–60, 67, 68]. These models are
equipped with extensive intrinsic knowledge, enabling them
to be increasingly applied to a broad spectrum of down-
stream applications, including both the language domain
(e.g., ChatGPT [51]) and many other data modalities (e.g., im-
ages [10, 13, 18, 21, 56], speech [7, 57, 70], video [6, 66]).
The recent extension further involves composite scenar-
ios [4, 5, 8, 9, 40, 46, 63, 73], where models are capable of
∗School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence Software
Technologies (MOE), Peking University
†Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao)
processing and interpreting data across several tasks simulta-
neously. However, training these models is highly resource-
intensive, requiring substantial GPU computing power. For
example, Meta has announced to release the world-leading
multi-modal model, LLaMA-3 [1], which has over 400B pa-
rameters and is trained on more than 48,000 GPUs.
Existing large model training systems are mainly designed
for a single model with only one input data modality. De-
spite the extensive research and engineering efforts aimed
at optimizing these systems from multiple perspectives, in-
cluding distributed communication [50, 62, 71, 72], memory
management [12, 61, 64], and GPU computation [15, 16],
their performance is still limited when it comes to handling
the increasingly complex requirements of multi-task (MT)
multi-modal (MM) models. We identify two unique obstacles
when building training systems for MT MM models.
One is the workload heterogeneity between different modal-
ities or tasks. On the one hand, MM models often handle data
that vary significantly in structure and size, demanding spe-
cialized preprocessing and computational approaches. For
example, language models (e.g., GPT-family [3, 11, 58, 59],
LLaMA-family [67, 68]) are usually equipped with dozens of
layers with the same configuration (e.g., hidden size), while
vision models may involve uneven layers to compute in var-
ious resolutions [39]. On the other hand, multiple tasks may
leverage distinct data flows and activate individual model
components, leading to inter-task workload heterogeneity.
Existing training systems usually overlook such heterogene-
ity and apply sub-optimal training methodologies.
Another is the execution dependency among different model
components. Recent MT MM model development usually
adopts a sub-model sharing approach [8, 9, 22, 46, 73], where
partial model layers containing common knowledge are
shared across different modalities and tasks. As shown in
arXiv:2409.03365v3
[cs.DC]
11
Feb
2025
Fig. 1, each data type also has its own learning component.
Within every training iteration, the input data mixed with
multiple modalities is simultaneously fed into the sophisti-
cated model, where different model components are intri-
cately activated and updated. To avoid redundant resource
usage, the shared components are usually responsible for
the data flows from multiple sources, resulting in execution
barriers and blocking the following model layers. In addition,
the proportion of different data modalities in MT workloads
may shift over time due to task addition and completion,
introducing further training complexity. To the best of our
knowledge, none of existing training systems can deal with
these unforeseen dependency efficiently due to the lack of
understanding MT MM model execution.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces Spindle,
a resource-efficient and high-performance training system
for large-scale MT MM models. Considering the workload
heterogeneity and execution dependency, a naïve solution is
to decouple the model structure based on modality and task,
replicate the shared components, and deploy them on sepa-
rate devices. In this way, each sub-model can be optimized
by existing systems, but it also brings significant resource
wastage and underutilization, as well as additional overheads
from replica synchronization. As an example, Fig. 1 show-
cases that such a naïve, decoupled execution suffers from
fluctuating device utilization both intra-task and inter-task
due to workload heterogeneity, leading to low or even idle
GPU utilization for some time slots.
Instead of decoupling, Spindle manages to directly train
the whole complex model without disjoint sub-model to min-
imize the resource usage. A key insight behind Spindle’s
design is that heterogeneous and dependent sub-models can
be decomposed into several sequentially executed waves.
Specifically, Spindle treats a wave as the smallest scheduling
unit for execution. Within each wave, the runtime engine
concurrently executes multiple sliced MetaOps (i.e., contin-
uously identical operators, as defined in §3.1). These sliced
MetaOps are distributed across distinct and fixed groups of
devices, while ensuring that their execution time costs are
balanced. The concept of wave is central to Spindle’s design
and operation. A more comprehensive definition of wave
will be provided in §3.4, along with a concrete example of 6
waves illustrated in Fig. 5b.
To achieve resource-efficient and high-performance train-
ing of MT MM models, there are three key challenges for
Spindle to address. In the following, we will introduce each
challenge and how Spindle solves them.
First, finding the optimal model parallel configuration
for heterogeneous workloads with diverse computational
characteristics is a complex combinatorial problem. Exist-
ing single-model automatic parallelization approaches (e.g.,
Alpa [87], Unity [69], Galvatron [44, 75]) assume a spatial
pipeline stage partition, and each operator (Op) is executed
Task 3
Audio
Depth Box
Vision
Task 2
Task 1
Text
Task 4
Motion Thermal
Modality
Encoders
Cross-Modal Module
0.00x 0.25x 0.50x 0.75x 1.00x 1.25x 1.50x 1.75x 2.00x
Timeline
40
80
120
TFLOPs/s
Task1 on 8GPUs Task2 on 4GPUs Task3 on 2GPUs Task4 on 2GPUs
Figure 1. The upper portion illustrates the general model
structure and training flow of MT MM training. The lower
portion displays the current device utilization, measured in
FLOPs per second, during the decoupled execution of four
tasks across 2 iterations. Utilization fluctuation of different-
colored and same-colored lines indicate inter-task and intra-
task workload heterogeneity, respectively.
by all devices of the corresponding pipeline stage. Unfortu-
nately, such assumptions only work for homogeneous mod-
els, failing to adapt to heterogeneous MT MM models.
Instead of solving the parallel configuration directly, Spin-
dle captures the workload heterogeneity at the operator gran-
ularity and estimates its execution overheads under different
amount of allocated resources and parallel configurations
(§3.2). The final configuration decision is left to the later step
since it requires to be jointly optimized with considering the
execution dependency. Spindle also introduces MetaOp to
contract the graph (i.e., fusing continuous identical opera-
tors) to avoid redundant estimation overheads and shrink
the problem scale (§3.1).
Second, breaking down the whole model into sequentially
executed waves may easily result in inefficiencies. Deter-
mining the optimal division of waves is complicated since
the operators differ significantly in execution overheads and
have intricate operator dependencies.
Spindle addresses this problem with two steps: 1) Spindle’s
resource allocator (§3.3) traverses the computation graph
following the dependency topology and decides the optimal
resource allocation for MetaOps in each candidate set (i.e.,
currently executable MetaOps). Here we reformulate this
issue as a malleable project scheduling problem (MPSP) and
subsequently derive the optimal solution. 2) After obtaining
the parallel configuration of each MetaOp, the wavefront
scheduler (§3.4) greedily slices and selects MetaOps to craft
compact waves and minimizes the overall execution time.
Third, given the resource allocation plan and wavefront
execution schedule, how to map them into physical devices
is still a problem, as different mapping may lead to distinct
2
inter-wave communication overheads and per-device mem-
ory consumption. To further improve the system efficiency,
Spindle carefully considers these trade-offs and the real envi-
ronment constraints (e.g., inter-device bandwidth, memory
capacity) when generating the device placement plan (§3.5).
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We present Spindle, a resource-efficient and high-
performance training system for MT MM models.
• We propose a jointly optimization framework to achieve
heterogeneity-aware workload parallelization and
dependency-driven execution scheduling.
• We build a general runtime engine to perform the
wavefront schedule, automatically resolving execu-
tion dependencies at the wave boundaries.
• We evaluate Spindle on various MT MM models, and
the results demonstrate the superior performance and
efficiency of Spindle compared with the state-of-the-
art baselines, with the speedup ratio up to 71%.
2 Preliminary
2.1 Multi-Task Multi-Modal Models
Foundation models, such as GPT series [3, 11, 59], LLaMA
series [67, 68], have set new benchmarks across various lan-
guage tasks and revolutionized deep learning. They’ve also
been successfully adapted for other modalities and tasks, in-
cluding image processing [10, 18, 39], audio processing [7, 57,
70], video analysis [6, 66]. Multi-modal models [8, 9, 14, 22,
56, 73] leverage these foundation models to integrate infor-
mation from multiple data modalities. Multi-modal models
typically have the multi-tower structure, utilizing multiple
modality encoders to extract modality features, and a cross-
modal module for feature alignment and fusing. Some of
these models fuse modality information via lightweight con-
trastive learning objectives [22, 25, 29, 56, 80, 81, 84], with
CLIP [56] being a notable example, and ImageBind [22] fur-
ther extending CLIP to six modalities. Others fuse modalities
via the language model with generative loss [19, 33, 34, 38, 73,
74, 83, 88], some leveraging the powerful pretrained LLMs.
Recently, researchers have begun to construct more com-
plicated multi-task multi-modal (MT MM) models [4, 8, 9, 46,
55], enabling processing diverse multi-modal tasks within a
unified model. This is because each modality encompasses
various tasks, and each task often involves multiple modali-
ties as well, and this reflects researchers’ aspiration towards
general-purpose AI. Fig. 1 (upper side) illustrates the general
structure and training flow of MT MM models. Flamingo [4]
is among the first to handle multiple vision-language tasks.
OFASys [9] proposes a general MT MM learning paradigm,
as shown in Fig. 1, designing distinct modality encoders and
cross-modal modules for different tasks and modalities, al-
lowing the activation of different components as required by
the task and modality at hand. For example, speech recogni-
tion and image captioning tasks shall activate and share the
Computation Graph
Task 2
Task 1
…
Scalability
Estimator
§3.2
Runtime Engine
§3.6
Device
Placement
§3.5
Training Framework
Execution Planner
Resource
Allocator
§3.3
Scaling Curves
n
T
Allocation Plan
n=2
n=1
n=2
n=1
T
Wavefront Schedule
Timeline
Execution Plan
Timeline
1
2
3
4
GPU Cluster
…
…
…
Wavefront
Scheduler
§3.4
Training
Graph
Contraction
§3.1
Profiling
MetaGraph
with MetaOps
Figure 2. Architecture overview of Spindle.
text encoder but feed the visual- and audio-inputs into differ-
ent encoders. Many empirical results [4, 8, 9, 40, 55, 63, 73]
have also shown that such a joint multi-task training para-
digm achieves better multi-modal capabilities for MT MM
models than performing single-task training separately.
2.2 Parallelisms in Distributed Training
As model sizes and training data volumes grow, modern
DL systems commonly employ various parallelism tech-
niques for distributed training on GPU clusters. Data par-
allelism (DP) [36, 61, 86] splits the input data, with each
device handling a portion of the data storage and compu-
tation, and synchronizing model gradients across devices.
Model parallelism [24, 28, 47, 48, 50] partitions model pa-
rameters, with each device responsible for a segment of the
model. Model parallelisms can be categorized into two pop-
ular types: tensor parallelism (TP) partitions the model ver-
tically [50], while pipeline parallelism (PP) [28, 47, 48] splits
the model horizontally, organizing model execution into a
pipeline. Contemporary distributed training systems, such
as Megatron-LM [50] and DeepSpeed [62], leverage multiple
parallelisms and implement a hybrid parallelism approach
for model training. For example, Megatron-LM introduces
3D parallelism, which concurrently utilizes DP, TP, and PP.
Researchers have also developed advanced automatic paral-
lelism [31, 44, 75, 87] techniques to facilitate the tuning of
optimal parallelism combinations, which integrates multiple
parallelism dimensions, employ sophisticated optimization
workflows, and automatically determine the most efficient
hybrid parallelism strategy. However, these existing training
system are mainly designed for single task and single model
training, with limited performance on the complex scenario
of training MT MM models.
3
3 System Design
Spindle is a highly efficient and scalable training framework
for MT MM models. Fig. 2 depicts its system architecture,
comprising the execution planner and the training frame-
work. Given the diverse user-defined training tasks and the
GPU cluster, the goal of Spindle is to devise the most efficient
execution plan to facilitate effective MT MM training.
Problem Formulation. We formalize the optimization prob-
lem of Spindle as follows. Firstly, Spindle interprets the in-
put tasks as a unified directed acyclic computation graph
G = (V, E), where each node 𝑖 ∈ V represents a compu-
tational operator and each edge ⟨𝑖, 𝑗⟩ ∈ E denotes the data
flow from operator 𝑖 to 𝑗. Each task activates specific opera-
tors and parameters with unique data flows. For instance, a
vision-related task activates a vision Transformer layer as
an operator, with image features serving as the data flow.
The left side of Fig. 3 displays an example of a computation
graph. Then, given the computation graph G and the GPU
cluster with 𝑁 devices, Spindle aims to minimize the max-
imal operator completion time 𝐶. Specifically, we need to
find an execution plan 𝑃, which assigns each operator 𝑖 ∈ V
with an AS-tuple ⟨𝑛𝑖,𝑠𝑖⟩ ∈ U, such that the operator 𝑖 is
Allocated 𝑛𝑖 devices and is Scheduled to execute from time
𝑠𝑖. Here the set U = {⟨𝑛,𝑠⟩|𝑛 ∈ N,𝑠 ≥ 0} is formed by all
valid AS-tuples. We further denote the execution time of
operator 𝑖 when allocated 𝑛𝑖 devices as 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑇𝑖 (𝑛𝑖). Then, the
optimization problem is formulated as follows. Here (2) is
the allocation capacity constraint for any time 𝑡, and (3) is
the operator dependency constraint.
arg min
𝑃={𝑖→⟨𝑛𝑖,𝑠𝑖 ⟩|
𝑖∈V,⟨𝑛𝑖,𝑠𝑖 ⟩∈U}
𝐶 B max
𝑖∈V
{𝑠𝑖 + 𝑡𝑖 } (1)
s.t.
∑︁
𝑡 ∈(𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑖 +𝑡𝑖 ),𝑖∈V
𝑛𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 for ∀𝑡 ∈ R+
(2)
𝑠𝑖 + 𝑡𝑖 ≤ 𝑠𝑗 for ∀⟨𝑖, 𝑗⟩ ∈ E (3)
Sketch of Solution. Before stepping into the solution, we’d
like to first present an overview for better readability. First,
Spindle initiates a graph contraction process (§3.1), contract-
ing the original graph G into a MetaGraph G𝑀 composed of
MetaOps (Fig. 3), where each MetaOp characterizes a unique
workload. This process further decouples MetaOps into dif-
ferent MetaLevels, ensuring that there are no dependencies
among MetaOps within the same MetaLevel. Second, the scal-
ability estimator (§3.2) estimates the execution time and re-
source scalability for each MetaOp, producing scaling curves
(Fig. 4). Following this, the resource allocator (§3.3) deduces
the allocation plan for each MetaLevel individually (Fig. 5a).
Given the allocation plan, the wavefront scheduler (§3.4)
slices the MetaOps and organizes them into waves, and pro-
duces the wavefront schedule for execution. Subsequently,
device placement (§3.5) strategies are then employed to as-
sign MetaOps to appropriate devices, resulting in the Spindle
execution plan (Fig. 5b). Finally, the runtime engine (§3.6)
utilizes this plan to instantiate the model on each device and
facilitate an efficient MT MM training process.
3.1 Graph Contraction
Depicting Workload Heterogeneity with MetaOps. Spin-
dle minimizes the execution time by optimizing resource
allocation and scheduling for each operator within G. This
optimization process necessitates an understanding of the
workload characteristics for each operator 𝑖 ∈ V, which can
be reflected by its execution time function 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑇𝑖 (𝑛𝑖), which
varies with the device allocation amount 𝑛𝑖. Given that G
typically includes a large number of operators while many of
them share similar workload characteristics (such as stacked
Transformer layers), Spindle initiates a graph contraction
process to streamline the complicated graph. It categorizes
operators based on their computational workload character-
istics, as illustrated in Fig. 3. In this process, operators are
contracted into a MetaOp if they meet the following criteria:
(1) There is a data flow between operator 𝑖 and 𝑗, i.e.,
⟨𝑖, 𝑗⟩ ∈ E, and both the out-degree of operator 𝑖 and
the in-degree of operator 𝑗 are 1, ensuring that they
are direct predecessors and successors to each other.
(2) Operator 𝑖 and 𝑗 share the same operator type and
input data size, confirming identical workloads.
During graph contraction, we traverse the original graph
G in topological order, contracting operators based on the
specified criteria until no further pairs of operators meeting
these conditions. This results in a contracted MetaGraph
G𝑀 = (V𝑀, E𝑀 ), with each node 𝑚 ∈ V𝑀 representing a
MetaOp that consists of 𝐿𝑚 consecutive operators in G. Since
operators in the same MetaOp share the same workload, we
slightly abuse the notation and denote the execution time
function for each operator in MetaOp 𝑚 as 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛).
Disentangling MetaOp Dependency with MetaLevels.
To facilitate operator-level resource allocation and schedul-
ing, we further introduce an abstraction called MetaLevel,
which signifies the level of dependency. MetaOps at the same
level are independent to each other. The level of each MetaOp
can be derived by a Breadth-First-Search (BFS), with the level
assigned based on the search depth, which inherently ensures
no dependency among the MetaOps of same level. By doing
so, the problem (1) can be dissected into several simplified
sub-problems for different MetaLevels. Next, we introduce
how Spindle derives the allocation and scheduling for each
MetaLevel individually, and merges them into the final plan.
3.2 Scalability Estimator
As MetaOps differ in operator types and/or input data sizes,
they characterize heterogeneous workloads and thus ne-
cessitate different amount of resources. Furthermore, these
MetaOps have distinct resource scalability (i.e., how its exe-
cution time varies w.r.t. the amount of allocated resources).
4
A B C
D E F G H
K L
N
I J
P Q
Computation Graph 𝓖 MetaGraph 𝓖𝑴
O
Audio Task 𝑇𝐴𝐿
Vision Task 𝑇𝑉𝐿
MetaOp Operators Operator Type Input Data Size
1 A, B, C Audio Op [8, 229, 768]
2 D, E Text Op [8, 77, 768]
3 F, G, H LM Op [8, 512, 1024]
4 I, J Text Op [4, 77, 768]
5 K, L Vision Op [4, 257, 768]
6 M, N Vision Op [4, 197, 768]
7 O, P, Q LM Op [4, 512, 1024]
𝑊1 𝑊2 𝑊3
𝑊4 𝑊6
𝑊5
𝑊9 𝑊10
𝑊7 𝑊8 𝑊4,5 𝑊6,7,8
𝑊1,2,3
𝑊9,10
Audio
MetaOp
Data Flow
𝑊 Parameters
Operator
Text
Vision LM
[4, 197, 768]
[4, 77, 768]
[8, 77, 768]
[8, 229, 768]
4
2
1
3
7
5
[4, 257, 768]
[4, 77, 768]
[8, 77, 768]
[8, 229, 768]
M
[4, 257, 768]
6
[4, 197, 768]
Figure 3. Computation graph G and contracted MetaGraph
G𝑀 .
For instance, the left side of Fig. 4 shows the execution time
of different MetaOps, 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), in Multitask-CLIP (a multi-task
extension of CLIP, detailed in §5.1). Some MetaOps show al-
most linear decreases in execution time as resources increase
(e.g., Task2-Vision), while others decrease much more slowly
(e.g., Task1-Text). The right side of Fig. 4 further shows the
value of 𝜍𝑚 (𝑛) = 𝑇𝑚 (1)/𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), which measures how much
the operator accelerates when using more GPUs, and a value
of 𝜍𝑚 (𝑛) closer to 𝑛 signifies better resource scalability. As
can be seen, different MetaOps not only have varying ex-
ecution time, but also exhibit different resource scalability,
posing a significant challenge for resource allocation.
In response to this issue, Spindle employs a scalability es-
timator to accurately capture the execution time and the re-
source scalability of each MetaOp. Previous works [44, 69, 87]
have designed effective estimation methods for distributed
training, commonly utilizing the 𝛼9𝛽 modelling [26]. How-
ever, although this may work well for homogeneous work-
loads (e.g., LLMs with homogeneous layers), we find that
it does not fit the workload heterogeneous nature of MT
MM models. This is because different MetaOps have distinct
workload and resource scalability, and the invoked kernels
may vary across different per-device workloads, therefore
causing distinct performance. In a nutshell, our scalability
estimator adopts the piecewise 𝛼9𝛽 modelling for more accu-
rate estimation of heterogeneous MT MM workloads. Given
the target MT MM model, it profiles several discrete data
points (𝑛𝑖,𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑖)) for each MetaOp under different paral-
lel configurations, and then fits the curve of piecewise 𝛼9𝛽
function. To estimate the execution time 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), it locates
the range that 𝑛 falls into, and returns the estimated time
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of GPUs
1
1.5
3
6
12
24
48
Execution
Time
MetaOP Execution Time
(per operator)
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of GPUs
1
2
4
8
16
32
Resource
Scalability
MetaOP Resource Scalability
Task1-Text
Task1-Audio
Task2-Vision
Task2-Depth
Task3-Audio
Task3-Thermal
Task4-Motion
Task4-Thermal
Figure 4. An example of the execution time and resource
scalability of MetaOps in 4-task Multitask-CLIP, denoted as
scaling curves.
according to the corresponding piecewise function. In prac-
tice, the profiling and estimating process for each MT MM
model takes within 5 minutes, which is negligible compared
to the training time. In Fig. 4, the scatter points represent
empirical measurements, while the curves depict the func-
tion estimated by our scalability estimator, which we denote
as scaling curves. As can be seen, our scalability estimator ef-
fectively and accurately estimates the execution time 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛)
for each MetaOp. More details are illustrated in Appendix A.
3.3 Resource Allocator
We now introduce our resource allocator, which allocates
appropriate computational resources to MetaOps. We first
transition problem (1) into the sub-problem on MetaLevel.
We then detail our allocation strategies, which first relax
constraints and optimize the continuous problem, and then
discretize the optimal solution for practical allocation plans.
Problem Formulation on MetaLevel. We first re-formulate
the problem (1) on one MetaLevel with a set of MetaOps de-
noted by e
V𝑀 . In this formulation, we split each MetaOp
into different execution part, by assigning it with several
ASL-tuples ⟨𝑛,𝑠,𝑙⟩ ∈ U𝑀 , such that 𝑙 consecutive operators
of this MetaOp are scheduled to execute from time 𝑠 with
𝑛 devices. Here U𝑀 = {⟨𝑛,𝑠,𝑙⟩|𝑛,𝑙 ∈ N,𝑠 ≥ 0} is formed
by all valid ASL-tuples. For each MetaOp 𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 , its exe-
cution plan is a set of ASL-tuples 𝑃𝑚. For a MetaLevel, the
execution plan 𝑃 consists of 𝑃𝑚 for all MetaOps 𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 ,
i.e., 𝑃 = {𝑚 → 𝑃𝑚}. Given 𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 and one ASL-tuple
𝑝 = ⟨𝑛
(𝑝)
𝑚 ,𝑠
(𝑝)
𝑚 ,𝑙
(𝑝)
𝑚 ⟩ ∈ 𝑃𝑚, we denote the execution time
span, end time, and time interval by 𝑡
(𝑝)
𝑚 = 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛
(𝑝)
𝑚 ) · 𝑙
(𝑝)
𝑚 ,
𝑒
(𝑝)
𝑚 = 𝑠
(𝑝)
𝑚 + 𝑡
(𝑝)
𝑚 , and 𝐼
(𝑝)
𝑚 = (𝑠
(𝑝)
𝑚 ,𝑒
(𝑝)
𝑚 ), respectively. The
5
Bi-point Discretizing on 𝒏
Rounding
on 𝒍
ASL-tuple 𝑛,⋅, 𝑙
for MetaOp 𝑚 with
execution time 𝐶
N = 4
MetaOps = {1, 2, 3}
𝑚 ×𝑙 ×𝑛
𝐶
Bisection Search
1 ×8
2 ×12
3 ×6
𝑷𝑴𝑷𝑺𝑷
×1.9
×1.5
×0.6
𝐶∗
1 ×8
2 ×8
3 ×6
2 ×4
0.96𝐶∗
1.02𝐶∗
0.6𝐶∗
Allocation Plan
×2
×2
×1
×1
Valid
Allocations
1 ×0.4
1 ×7.6
×2
2 ×8.4
3
3 ×0
Dummy Allocation
𝐶∗
2 ×3.6
×1
×2
×1
×1
×0
Ignored
×6
(a) Illustration of workflow of Spindle allocator, which
allocates resources to 3 MetaOps on 4 devices.
MetaLevel 1
Execution Plan
Wave 1 Wave 2 Wave 3
Devices
1
1 1
2
4
5
1
2
4
6
Wave 6
Wave 4 Wave 5
MetaLevel 2
4
2
7
3
3
extended
Iteration Timeline
0
3
4
7
Node
0 2
1
5
6
Node
1
1 MetaOp Data Flow
Operator
Audio Text Vision LM
Audio Task 𝑇𝐴𝐿 Vision Task 𝑇𝑉𝐿
Wave MetaOp 1 MetaOp 2 MetaOp 4 MetaOp 5 MetaOp 6
1 [8, ·
, 2], [4, ·
, 9] [2, ·
, 14], [1, ·
, 2] [2, ·
, 3], [1, ·
, 13] [1, ·
, 6] [1, ·
, 6]
2 [8, ·
, 2], [4, ·
, 9] [2, ·
, 14], [1, ·
, 2] [2, ·
, 3], [1, ·
, 13] [1, ·
, 6] [1, ·
, 6]
3 [4, ·
, 8] [2, ·
, 12], [1, ·
, 2] [2, ·
, 3], [1, ·
, 13] [1, ·
, 6] [1, ·
, 6]
4 [4, ·
, 2] [2, ·
, 12], [1, ·
, 2] [1, ·
, 4] [1, ·
, 6] [1, ·
, 6]
Finish [4, ·
, 2] [1, ·
, 2] [1, ·
, 4] [1, ·
, 6]
Scheduling
Process
Allocation Plan
of MetaLevel 1
(b) Example of Spindle execution plan consisting of 6 waves.
Figure 5. Illustration of Spindle allocator and Spindle execution plan.
problem can be re-written as:
arg min
𝑃={𝑚→𝑃𝑚 |𝑚∈ f
V𝑀,𝑃𝑚 ⊂2U𝑀 }
e
𝐶 B max
𝑚∈ f
V𝑀,𝑝∈𝑃𝑚
{𝑒
(𝑝)
𝑚 } (4)
s.t.
∑︁
𝑡 ∈𝐼
(𝑝)
𝑚 ,𝑚∈ f
V𝑀,𝑝∈𝑃𝑚
𝑛
(𝑝)
𝑚 ≤ 𝑁 for ∀𝑡 ∈ R+
(5)
𝐼
(𝑝1 )
𝑚 ∩ 𝐼
(𝑝2 )
𝑚 = ∅ for ∀𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀, 𝑝1, 𝑝2 ∈ 𝑃𝑚 (6)
∑︁
𝑝∈𝑃𝑚
𝑙
(𝑝)
𝑚 = 𝐿𝑚 for ∀𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 (7)
Compared with the original problem (1), the sub-problem (4)
on MetaLevel gets rid of the dependency constraint, while
the constraint (6) enforces the execution intervals of ASL-
tuples in 𝑃𝑚 to be pairwise disjoint, because operators within
the same MetaOp cannot execute simultaneously, and (7)
ensures all operators are executed for each MetaOp.
Optimum of the Continuous Problem. If we relax the
constraints, allowing GPU resources and operators to be
continuously divisible (i.e., 𝑛 and 𝑙 in ASL-tuples are not
limited to integers), the problem is transformed into a well-
established problem, malleable project scheduling problem
(MPSP), with malleable projects and continuously divisible
resources [20]. We denote the optimal solution of this re-
laxed problem by 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 . Prior works [76, 77] have given the
following theorem.
Theorem 1. If the execution time functions 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), 𝑛 ∈ R+,
are positive and non-increasing for every MetaOp 𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 ,
then 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 = {𝑚 → 𝑃𝑚} satisfies that 𝑃𝑚 = {⟨𝑛∗
𝑚, 0, 𝐿𝑚⟩}, ∀𝑚 ∈
e
V𝑀 , where the optimum objective e
𝐶∗ and allocations 𝑛∗
𝑚 can
be found from
𝑇𝑚 (𝑛∗
𝑚) · 𝐿𝑚 = e
𝐶∗
for ∀𝑚 ∈ e
V𝑀 and
∑︁
𝑚∈ f
V𝑀
𝑛∗
𝑚 = 𝑁 . (8)
From Theorem 1, it follows that in the optimal situation,
all MetaOps start simultaneously, execute all their operators,
and finish together. They share an identical end time𝑒𝑚 = e
𝐶∗,
which is exactly the minimized operator completion time.
To achieve 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 , our allocator utilizes the scaling curves
from §3.2 to acquire an estimation of 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), and performs
a bisection search procedure over e
𝐶∗ with the following
equation. The details are illustrated in Appendix B.
∑︁
𝑚∈ f
V𝑀
𝑇-1
𝑚

e
𝐶∗
/𝐿𝑚

= 𝑁 . (9)
Bi-point Discretized Allocation. From the continuous
problem, we’ve determined the optimal time e
𝐶∗, as well as
the optimal allocations for each MetaOp, 𝑛∗
𝑚, which is a
real number. To reinstate 𝑛’s as integers, our allocator com-
putes each MetaOp’s proper discrete allocations individu-
ally. For every MetaOp 𝑚, it uses two discrete ASL-tuples
⟨𝑛𝑚, ·,𝑙𝑚⟩, ⟨𝑛𝑚, ·,𝑙𝑚⟩ to linearly represent the continuous, op-
timal solution ⟨𝑛∗
𝑚, 0, 𝐿𝑚⟩ in 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 . To preserve the optimum
property of 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 , we require the discretized allocation plan
to satisfy the following two conditions:
𝐿𝑚 = 𝑙𝑚 + 𝑙𝑚 (10a) e
𝐶∗
= 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚)·𝑙𝑚 +𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚)·𝑙𝑚 (10b)
Cond. (10a) ensures these two discrete ASL-tuples complete
the workload of MetaOp 𝑚, and Cond. (10b) ensures their to-
tal execution time is exactly equal to the minimum operator
completion time e
𝐶∗ in 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 , thus perserving the optimum
6
property. Here we first select 𝑛𝑚,𝑛𝑚 as the closest valid in-
teger numbers such that 𝑛∗
𝑚 ∈ [𝑛𝑚,𝑛𝑚], and 𝑙𝑚,𝑙𝑚 ∈ R+ are
derived naturally. For instance, as shown in Fig. 5a, MetaOp 2
with𝑛∗
2 = 1.5, 𝐿2 = 12 in 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 is discretized as𝑛2 = 2,𝑛2 = 1
and 𝑙2 = 8.4,𝑙2 = 3.6 in this step. Here we impose the valid
constraint on the allocation 𝑛 for MetaOp 𝑚 for practical rea-
sons. For instance, if an MetaOp is applied data parallelism,
its allocation 𝑛 is supposed to divide its global batch size 𝐵𝑚
to avoid resource under-utilization due to uneven partition
of samples. For another example, if an MetaOp is applied
tensor parallelism or sequence parallelism with degree 2,
its allocation 𝑛 is supposed to be divisible by this degree,
thus 𝑛 = 3, 5, 7 as invalid. Such valid constraint ensures the
allocation plan for each MetaOp is practical. Specially, allo-
cation with 𝑛𝑚 = 0 is treated as a dummy allocation (e.g.,
MetaOp 3 in Fig. 5a), which preserves the optimum property
of Cond. (10b) but will then be ignored.
Then, we reinstates𝑙’s as integers by rounding𝑙𝑚,𝑙𝑚 to the
nearest integers. If the rounded 𝑙 equals 0, this ASL-tuple will
be ignored. This rounding procedure preserves the integrity
of Cond. (10a) and introduces only minor bias to Cond. (10b).
Finally, the discretized ASL-tuples of all MetaOps form the
allocation plan. Note that the allocation plan only ensures the
longest execution time among all MetaOps is approximately
e
𝐶∗, yet it does not specify the start time for each ASL-tuple,
which is determined by wavefront scheduler in §3.4.
3.4 Wavefront Scheduler
Given the allocation plan from the resource allocator, we now
describe how Spindle schedules the execution of MetaOps.
We first introduce the concept of wave, the scheduling unit of
Spindle. Then we present our wavefront scheduling, which
schedules the execution of MetaOps greedily for each wave.
Finally, the operator dependencies among MetaLevels are
reinstated by merging the wavefront schedules together.
Definition of wave. It is worthy to note that, although The-
orem 1 implies that all MetaOps share the same start and
end time in the continuous form, this property does not hold
after the discretization process. The reason is that the ex-
ecution time of ASL-tuples may vary, or the resources are
insufficient to execute all tuples concurrently. To cope with
this problem, we devise a fine-grained wavefront scheduler
that slices the MetaOps and selects a few of them to exe-
cute concurrently on different groups of devices. We define
wave as the smallest scheduling unit, which corresponds to
one concurrent execution as aforementioned. The wavefront
scheduler attempts to minimize the device idle time in each
wave, by (1) occupying the devices as many as possible to
maximize device utilization (Wavefront Scheduling step 1
○
2
○), and (2) aligning the execution time spans of different
sliced MetaOps to avoid idle time (Wavefront Scheduling
Algorithm 1: Wavefront Scheduling for one MetaLevel
Input: # Devices 𝑁, start time 𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ,
𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑐_𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 = {𝑚 → {⟨𝑛𝑚, ·,𝑙𝑚⟩, ⟨𝑛𝑚, ·,𝑙𝑚⟩}}
Output: Wavefront schedule 𝑃 =
Ð
𝑘 S𝑘, end time 𝑇𝑒𝑛𝑑
1 𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ; 𝑃 ← ∅; S𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 ← 𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑐_𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛;
2 while S𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 is not empty do // schedule for wave 𝑘
3 S𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← Propose_Candidate_Set(𝑁, S𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛);
4 S𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 ← Extend_Resources_If_Needed(S𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑);
5 𝑇𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒, S𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑 ← Align_Time_Span(S𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑);
6 S𝑘 ← Set_Start_Time(S𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑,𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ); 𝑃 ← 𝑃 ∪ S𝑘;
7 S𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 ← S𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 − S𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑; 𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 +𝑇𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒;
8 return 𝑃,𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡
step 3
○). As illustrated in Fig. 5b, resource (device) alloca-
tion remains unchanged in one wave, and transmission of
data flow occurs only between two waves. Next, we intro-
duce our greedy algorithm that crafts the waves to form the
scheduling plan.
Wavefront Scheduling. As outlined in Alg. 1, the scheduler
iteratively crafts waves in a greedy manner. Below we discuss
how one wave is crafted with Fig. 5b as an example.
1
○ First, the scheduler greedily proposes ASL-tuples to form
a candidate set, aiming to utilize as many devices as possible
(line 3). For instance with Fig. 5b, the scheduler proposes the
first ASL-tuple of MetaOp 1 to craft wave 1 since it occupies
all devices. Similarly, for wave 2, it proposes the ASL-tuples
of MetaOp 1, 2, and 4, which correspond to 4, 2, 2 devices,
respectively, in order to make full use of all devices.
2
○ If the candidate set fails to occupy all devices, the cluster
resources will be underutilized. To address this issue, we
extend the allocated resources in specific tuples to ensure all
devices are utilized (line 4). For instance, in wave 4 of Fig. 5b,
the allocation of MetaOp 4 is extended from 1 device to 2
devices. Resource extension is prioritized for MetaOps with
larger remaining execution time, with the hope of balancing
the remaining workload among the MetaOps.
3
○ In most cases, the proposed ASL-tuples differ in execu-
tion time. If we directly craft a wave with them, it would be
inefficient since there must be idle devices. Fortunately, this
can be avoided by dissecting the ASL-tuples to align their
time span (i.e., only a few number of operators in the MetaOp
are scheduled in this wave). For instance, in wave 2 of Fig. 5b,
the proposed ASL-tuples for MetaOp 1, 2, and 4 correspond
to 9, 14, and 3 operators, respectively. To align the execution
time, the ASL-tuples for MetaOp 1 and 2 are dissected, with
only 1 and 2 operators of them being scheduled, while the
remaining 8 and 13 operators left to be scheduled in subse-
quent waves. Our scheduler simply aligns the time span w.r.t.
the ASL-tuple with shortest execution time (e.g., the one for
MetaOp 4 in previous example), and computes the aligned
time span as the duration of current wave (line 5).
7
1MB
10MB
1MB
10MB
20MB Inter-Island Comm.
Intra-Island Comm.
Intra-Device Copy
Data Flow Volume
𝑥 MB
Figure 6. Illustration of Spindle device placement.
4
○ After the time span alignment, the scheduler concludes
the current wave (lines 6-7), including specifying the start
time for operators that are scheduled in this wave, and re-
moving them from the remaining set.
Merging MetaLevels. As stated in §3.1, MetaOps are decou-
pled into MetaLevels to disentangle operator dependencies.
Spindle invokes the aforementioned allocation and schedul-
ing for each MetaLevel individually, and merges their wave-
front schedules together as the final execution schedule.
3.5 Device Placement
Given the wavefront schedule, which consists of the alloca-
tion amount and execution time of each MetaOp, we now
discuss how Spindle determines the specific devices for each
MetaOp, known as device placement, which affects the inter-
wave communication overhead and memory consumption.
Spindle employs several guidelines based on empirical in-
sights or observations to optimize device placement.
Intra-Device-Island Placement. Placement within a de-
vice island is always preferred for each MetaOp and data
flow between MetaOps. A device island consists of devices
connected by high-bandwidth interconnects (e.g., NVLink),
typically adjacent devices, such as adjacent GPUs within
one node. For MetaOps, prioritizing intra-island placement
reduces the potential intra-MetaOp communication costs.
For data flow between MetaOps across waves, intra-island
placement reduces transmission costs leveraging the high
intra-island bandwidth or even faster intra-device copying.
Prioritizing High Communication Workloads. When
it’s infeasible to place all MetaOps and data flows within the
device island, Spindle will estimate the communication vol-
ume of each MetaOp and data flow to prioritize placing those
with higher volumes within a device island. For instance, in
Fig. 6, the data flow volume between red MetaOps is signifi-
cantly higher than that between yellow ones. Therefore, Spin-
dle prefers to place the data flow between red ones within
the island. This guideline ensures the most communication-
intensive components receive the most efficient hardware
configuration to minimize communication overhead.
Device Memory Balance. As each device holds hetero-
geneous MetaOps, the memory overhead varies across de-
vices. Placing too many memory-intensive MetaOps on a
Wave-by-Wave Forward
①Instantiate MetaOp
②Insert Transmission
③ Param Device Group ④ Training Step
.
.
.
.
.
.
Parameter Device Group Pool
𝑖
. . .
. . .
𝑊
𝑗1
𝑊
𝑗2
Device Group 𝐷𝑖
Parameter Set {𝑊
𝑗} ... 𝑊
𝑗3
𝑊
𝑗4
...
𝑊
𝑗5
. . .
Parameter Synchronization
Wave-by-Wave Backward
Figure 7. Illustration of Spindle runtime engine.
single device may cause out-of-memory (OOM) errors. There-
fore, Spindle actively balance the memory load across all de-
vices during placement. Specifically, Spindle estimates each
MetaOp’s memory consumption, tracks available memory
on devices, and prioritizes placement on the device with the
most available memory. Besides, for MetaOps sharing the
same parameters, we prioritize placing them on the same
device to minimize redundant storage.
Based on these guidelines, Spindle performs device place-
ment wave by wave greedily, prioritizing the minimization of
communication overhead, such as inter-wave transmission,
while simultaneously maintaining device memory balance.
When OOM occurs due to imbalanced placement, Spindle
will consider alternative placements with sub-optimal com-
munication costs and better memory balance. If necessary,
backtracking is employed to adjust the placements from ear-
lier waves to effectively address the OOM issues.
3.6 Runtime Engine
The runtime engine is responsible for running the execution
plan to facilitate efficient MT MM training, which is more
complex than conventional single-task training, as each de-
vice handles heterogeneous MetaOps and local computation
graphs. Spindle runtime engine operates in four main steps:
(1) Localization. Initially, Spindle localizes the execution
plan to each device. Specifically, each device instantiates the
corresponding MetaOp of each wave locally, and initializes
the required model components and parameters.
(2) Intra-task Data Dependency. Secondly, Spindle in-
serts transmission operators to connect the MetaOps across
waves to handle the data flow dependencies, including for-
ward activations and backward gradients. According to the
devices of MetaOps and data format requirements, opera-
tions such as copy, shard, concat, send, and receive are used
to transmit data flows with minimal overhead. This step
not only correctly handles data flow dependencies between
MetaOps but also links the MetaOps on each device into a
complete local computation graph ready for execution.
(3) Inter-task Model Dependency. Then, Spindle man-
ages parameter device groups for synchronization among
various tasks by maintaining a global parameter device group
8
pool. During each iteration, for each parameter 𝑊𝑗 , all tasks
or modalities that activate it on different devices contribute
to its gradient, which needs to be accumulated and synchro-
nized to facilitate parameter sharing. Therefore, before the
training process, Spindle scans all devices to determine the
device group 𝐷𝑖 for each parameter 𝑊𝑗 , which represents
𝑊𝑗 is shared and should be synchronized within group 𝐷𝑖.
For efficiency, Spindle manages parameters with the same
device group collectively and maintains a global parameter
device group pool {𝐷𝑖 → {𝑊𝑗 }}, where each device group
𝐷𝑖 corresponds to a set of parameters {𝑊𝑗 }.
(4) Training Step. Finally, the training process is ready to
begin. In each iteration of Spindle, each device executes the
forward and backward propagation of the local computation
graph in a wave-by-wave manner, which is comprised of the
interleaved execution of MetaOps and transmission of data
flow. Following the forward and backward phases, Spindle
performs group-wise parameter synchronization to maintain
the parameter consistency. Specifically, each parameter set
{𝑊𝑗 } is synchronized within its corresponding device group
𝐷𝑖 in the parameter device group pool.
4 Implementation
Spindle is an efficient and scalable MT MM training sys-
tem built on PyTorch with 10K Loc in Python: 2.1K LoC
for the execution planner and 7.9K LoC for the runtime en-
gine. We implement the data flow transmission with NCCL
batched P2P primitives and the parameter device groups
with NCCL communication groups. Spindle provides the
users with simple, user-friendly and flexible API for defining
MT MM training workloads. Specifically, training tasks in
Spindle are represented as SpindleTask, and users can define
various multi-modal tasks by customizing PyTorch modules
and connecting them flexibly through the add_flow API in
Spindle. Alternatively, user can also define different com-
putational logic for various tasks implicitly within a single
unified model. Spindle can automatically split the modules
and construct SpindleTasks via PyTorch FX Tracer, stream-
lining task definition. After the definition of multi-modal
tasks, Spindle conducts the optimization workflow automat-
ically, as illustrated in Fig. 2, and the Spindle runtime engine
provides efficient and scalable model training process.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Setups
Competitors. We compare Spindle with SOTA (state-of-
the-art) distributed training systems, Megatron-LM [50] and
DeepSpeed [62]. We also introduce other two systems that
represent typical strategies for multi-task training, consid-
ering inter-task and intra-task heterogeneity respectively.
Tab. 1a summarizes the features of competitors.
(1)&(2) Megatron-LM & DeepSpeed: Megatron-LM [50]
and DeepSpeed [62] are widely used SOTA training systems
Table 1. Experimental setups.
(a) Heterogeneity awareness of system competitors.
Competitors Inter-Task Intra-Task
Megatron-LM / DeepSpeed % %
DistMM-MT % "
Spindle-Optimus " %
Spindle " "
(b) Configuration of MT MM models for evaluation.
MT MM
Model
Multitask-
CLIP
OFASys QWen-VAL
# Param. 1.20B 0.66B 9.25B
# Modalities 6 6 3
# Tasks 10 7 3
Cross-Modal
Module
Contrastive
Loss
Enc-Dec
LLM
Dec-only
LLM
tailored for single-task training. The naïve approach to train
MT MM models on these systems is to decouple all sub-
models on separate devices (§1), which requires plenty of
resources and is impractical. Therefore, we decouple sub-
models on temporal dimension within each iteration, where
each sub-model takes up the whole cluster within a short
time period, and is dependently and sequentially executed.
(3) DistMM-MT: DistMM [27] is a recent training system
designed for multi-modal models, but focusing on single task
only. DistMM-MT represents a multi-task (MT) extension of
DistMM. It decouples multi-tasks, and for each single MM
task allocates appropriate resources to different multi-tower
modality encoders. Then it executes tasks sequentially.
(4) Spindle-Optimus: This baseline represents a workload-
aware task-level resource allocation strategy, which adapts
allocations according to the workload at the task level gran-
ularity. It’s inspired by Optimus [53], an effective cluster
job scheduling system which proposes a greedy resource
allocation scheme and iteratively assigns devices to the job
that has the largest marginal gain. Despite differences be-
tween job scheduling and multi-task training (§6), we apply
a similar principle and devise the marginal gain as (𝑇 (c)
𝑚 (𝑛)−
𝑇 (c)
𝑚 (𝑛′)/(𝑛′ − 𝑛), i.e., the task completion time reduction
scaled by the allocation increment from 𝑛 to 𝑛′. Here 𝑛′ is
the next valid allocation number larger than 𝑛.
Experimental Workloads. As illustrated in Tab. 1b, we
select three models to represent popular MT MM workloads
and conduct experiments on these workloads.
(1) Multitask-CLIP, which adopts the same structure of
ImageBind [22], is a multi-task variation to the classic and
pioneer CLIP [56] model. Many multi-modal models [22, 25,
29, 56, 80, 84] follow this paradigm for multi-task training.
9
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1.21×
1.22×
1.52×
0.96×
1×
1.36×
1.09×
1.08×
1.2×
1.02×
1.05×
1.09×
1×
1×
1×
Multitask-CLIP, 4 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
1.31×
1.26×
1.54×
0.73×
0.84×
1.15×
1.09×
1.09×
1.17×
1.02×
1.04×
1.01×
1×
1×
1×
Multitask-CLIP, 7 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
3100
1.37×
1.33×
1.71×
0.5×
0.93×
1.38×
1.08×
1.08×
1.14×
1.01×
1.02×
1.05×
1×
1×
1×
Multitask-CLIP, 10 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1.53×
1.42×
1.51×
1.23×
1.2×
1.28×
1.01×
1.01×
1.04×
0.99×
0.98×
1.01×
1×
1×
1×
OFASys, 4 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
1.71×
1.43×
1.33×
1.17×
1.12×
1.13×
1.07×
1.03×
1.06×
1.02×
0.98×
1.01×
1×
1×
1×
OFASys, 7 Tasks
4Nodes(32GPUs) 8Nodes(64GPUs)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
1.16×
1.63×
1.04×
1.44×
1.04×
1.11×
1.02×
1.03×
1×
1×
QWen-VAL 10B, 3 Tasks
Spindle Spindle-Optimus DistMM-MT Megatron-LM DeepSpeed
Figure 8. End-to-end performance comparison for Spindle and baseline systems. Shorter bars indicate superior system
performance. The numbers above the bars denote each system’s speedup compared to DeepSpeed (larger than 1 is faster).
Its cross-modal module (contrastive loss), has much smaller
workload compared to its modality encoder, where most
computation occurs.
(2) OFASys [9] further generalizes the MT MM paradigm,
using a unified LM of encoder-decoder structure for cross-
modal processing. In OFASys, the cross-modal module’s
workload is comparable to that of the modality encoders.
(3) QWen-VAL [8, 14] adopts a modern, compute-intensive
decoder-only LLM, with the workload of the cross-modal
module usually larger than modality encoders. Recent multi-
modal models like SPHINX-X [37], DeepSpeed-VisualChat [82],
and BLIP-2 [33], employ this structure.
These workloads effectively represent the majority of MT
MM workloads (and different workload distribution between
modality encoders and cross-modal modules in Fig. 1), re-
gardless of specific model structure variations.
Protocols. We conduct experiments on an 8-node GPU clus-
ter. Each node consists of 8 NVIDIA A800 80 GB GPUs
equipped with NVLink, and the nodes are interconnected
by 400 Gbps InfiniBand. Since the baseline systems do not
support automatic planning given a targeted MT MM model
training workload, we manually tune their parallel config-
urations and memory optimization techniques (e.g., data
and tensor parallelism degree, ZeRO stage, activation check-
pointing, and etc.) to achieve the best performance. Averaged
training time over 100 iterations is reported.
5.2 End-to-End Performance
Fig. 8 displays end-to-end iteration time comparisons be-
tween Spindle and baseline systems across various model
workloads, multi-modal task configurations, and cluster sizes.
Comparison with SOTA systems. In general, compared to
SOTA training systems, i.e., Megatron-LM and DeepSpeed,
Spindle achieves speedup ratios of up to 67% and 71%, re-
spectively. Below we delve into details.
To begin with, Spindle consistently outperforms the com-
petitors across different task configurations. Notably, Spindle
excels when handling a larger number of tasks. On the 10-
task Multitask-CLIP and 7-task OFASys workloads, Spindle
achieves speedup ratios ranging from 31% to 71% compared
to SOTA systems. This underscores Spindle’s excellent scala-
bility with increasing task counts.
In addition, Spindle consistently achieves optimal per-
formance across various cluster sizes. On Multitask-CLIP,
Spindle achieves the highest speedup ratios of 37%, 33%,
and 71% on 8, 16, and 32 GPUs, respectively. Notably, Spin-
dle maintains high efficiency even when the scalability of
SOTA systems begins to diminish — that is, when the in-
crease in resources does not correspond to significant speed
improvements. For example, in 4-task Multitask-CLIP, ex-
panding the cluster size from 16 to 32 GPUs results in only
modest speedup of up to 1.21× for SOTA systems, whereas
Spindle still achieves a 1.45× speedup. This efficiency stems
from Spindle’s heterogeneity-aware and operator-level fine-
grained resource allocation and scheduling. For example, for
a lightweight audio operator, DeepSpeed needs to parallelize
it on the whole cluster with 16 GPUs due to its workload-
unaware nature, causing the computational kernel to be un-
derutilized or even idle, while Spindle may parallelize it with
only 4 GPUs to ensure high utilization. Besides, when scaling
from 16 to 32 GPUs, Spindle may maintain 4-GPU-allocation
for the lightweight operator to keep high utilization.
More importantly, Spindle also exhibits excellent scalabil-
ity w.r.t. model size. On larger model QWen-VAL, Spindle
achieves a maximum speedup of 1.16× on 32 GPUs and 1.63×
on 64 GPUs. Notably, when training QWen-VAL, Spindle
achieves a 1.78× speedup when scaling from 32 to 64 GPUs,
whereas SOTA systems only achieve up to 1.27× speedup.
10
0.50× 1.00× 1.50×
Timeline
0
40
80
120
TFLOPs/s
Cluster Utilization (1 Iteration)
Spindle Spindle-Optimus DistMM-MT DeepSpeed
(a) Average cluster utilization over time within one iteration. Higher
positions on the y-axis indicate higher utilization.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 13 14
15
16
Device ID
0
50
100
Device Utilization
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
MetaOp ID
0
50
100
MetaOp Utilization
Spindle
Spindle-Optimus
DistMM-MT
DeepSpeed
(b) Utilization of each device and each MetaOp. Points closer to the
outer edge of the spider chart represent higher utilization.
Figure 9. Case study of Multitask-CLIP (4 tasks, 16 GPUs).
Utilization is measured in computation FLOPs per second.
This is unsurprising since Spindle allows flexible allocations
to avoid the unsatisfactory scalability of MetaOps with light
workloads, as discussed above and in §3.2.
Comparison with other baselines. Next, we discuss the
performance of other baselines, i.e., Spindle-Optimus with
task-level resource allocation strategies, and DistMM-MT
with the single-task strategy for MM models.
Spindle-Optimus, employing workload-aware task-level
resource allocation, exhibits great performance, especially in
larger-scale clusters, with the speedup ratio up to 44% com-
pared to DeepSpeed. However, there are still many scenarios
where it underperforms. Its task-level strategy overlooks the
workload heterogeneity within tasks, thereby limiting train-
ing efficiency. Moreover, the coarse granularity at task level
can sometimes fail to achieve ideal load balancing among
tasks, causing many devices to become idle during the latter
part of the iteration. In comparison, Spindle enables finer-
grained strategy, with operator-level resource allocation and
wavefront load balancing, consistently achieving higher effi-
ciency compared to Spindle-Optimus.
DistMM-MT also performs better than SOTA systems in
most cases, with the speedup up to 20%, benefiting from
its intra-task workload awareness and resource allocation.
However, it’s designed for single-task MM models, which
decouples tasks and optimizes each one separately, making
it far from achieving the global optimum in multi-task cases.
For OFASys, DistMM-MT shows poor performance. This
is because DistMM-MT gains acceleration by parallelizing
sub-models in the same task. However, OFASys uses a light-
weight text adaptor, so most tasks that pair a modality with
text are dominated by the other modality, making the sub-
model parallelization ineffective. Compared to DistMM-MT,
Spindle jointly optimizes the allocation and scheduling of all
tasks and operators, therefore consistently outperforming
the single-task strategy of DistMM-MT, achieving a speedup
ratio of up to 59%.
5.3 Case Study
To better understand the advantages and performance gain of
Spindle over the other competitors, we further conduct an in-
depth case study of Multitask-CLIP (4 tasks, 16 GPUs). Fig. 9
presents system performance considering three key metrics:
cluster average utilization over time, average utilization per
device, and computational utilization of each MetaOp.
Firstly, DeepSpeed, representing SOTA systems, which ex-
ecutes the tasks sequentially with all resources, experiences
fluctuating utilization due to the workload heterogeneity,
leading to generally low overall utilization. Spindle-Optimus,
which allocates resources at task level, improves cluster uti-
lization at the iteration beginning, but as tasks with light
workloads finish, more devices become idle, declining overall
utilization. DistMM-MT manages to enhance utilization via
intra-task resource allocation, but the ignorance of inter-task
heterogeneity limits its utilization. In contrast, Spindle main-
tains consistently high utilization throughout the iteration.
Furthermore, Spindle significantly elevates the utilization
of all devices and MetaOps, showcasing its superior handling
of workload balance via operator-level strategies. In contrast,
DeepSpeed shows lower utilization across all devices and
MetaOps. Although task-level strategies of Spindle-Optimus
can enhance the utilization of certain devices, the coarse
granularity of allocation inevitably leads to workload im-
balances, leaving many devices underutilized. DistMM-MT
also improves the utilization of certain devices and MetaOps,
but the results are still unsatisfactory as it fails to reach the
global optimal parallel plan for multi-tasks. Overall, Spindle’s
unified optimization captures a close-to-optimal execution
plan with workload balance, leading to consistently high
utilization in all aspects.
5.4 Time Breakdown
Fig. 10 shows the runtime breakdown for Spindle and Deep-
Speed across various workloads, primarily consisting of for-
ward and backward propagation, parameter synchronization,
and inter-wave send and receive. We’ve isolated parameter
synchronization from the backward phase for individual
analysis. In MT MM training, the forward and backward
propagation dominates the runtime, typically accounting for
80%-95% due to the large number of tasks and computational
demands. Spindle focuses on reducing this significant time
component through flexible resource allocation and sched-
uling. Parameter synchronization usually consumes a small
11
1Node 2Nodes
Multitask-CLIP, 10Tasks
1Node 2Nodes
OFASys, 7Tasks
4Nodes 8Nodes
QWen-VAL, 3Tasks
0
1000
2000
3000
Iteration
Time
(ms)
DS
DS
DS
3.2%
3.8%
1.7%
Sp
Sp
Sp
9.7%
10.3%
6.1%
Sp*
Sp*
Sp*
DS
DS
DS
5.7%
6.2%
2.5%
Sp
Sp Sp
27%
20.6%
8.7%
Sp*
Sp* Sp*
DS: DeepSpeed
Sp: Spindle
Sp*: Spindle w/o DP
Sync Fwd&Bwd Send&Recv
Figure 10. Time breakdown analysis. Percentage of inter-
wave send & receive in total time is labeled for ablation study.
4Tasks 7Tasks
2Nodes (16GPUs)
10Tasks 4Tasks 7Tasks
4Nodes (32GPUs)
10Tasks
250
500
750
1000
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1×
1×
1.02×
1.05×
1×
1×
1.07×
1.07×
1×
1×
1.07×
1.07×
Theoretical Optimum Spindle
Figure 11. Optimality analysis of Spindle execution planner.
Evaluated on Multitask-CLIP.
fraction of the time, about 5%-15%, since it only occurs after
accumulating gradients from multiple tasks. Furthermore,
while Spindle introduces extra overhead for inter-wave send
and receive, this overhead remains minimal, typically not
exceeding 6%, thanks to the device placement mechanism
that avoids unnecessary communications.
Ablation on Device Placement. We conduct an ablation
study on the device placement strategy in §3.5, focusing on
its impact on inter-wave communication overhead, which is
the extra overhead of our system. Specifically, we compare
it with a sequential placement strategy, which assigns each
MetaOp with consecutive devices. In Fig. 10, our results in-
dicate that the inter-wave communication overhead of the
sequential placement strategy is approximately 3-6 times
greater than that of Spindle, taking up to 27% of the end-to-
end training time. However, Spindle’s placement strategies
reduces this overhead to 6%. This demonstrates the effective-
ness of our locality-aware placement, which significantly
reduces the extra communication overhead.
5.5 Execution Planner Evaluation
Optimality Analysis. We analyze the optimality of Spin-
dle execution planner in Fig. 11 by comparing the itera-
tion time to the theoretical optimum e
𝐶∗ derived from Theo-
rem 1. Although unachievable due to the relaxed constraints
(§3.3), e
𝐶∗ serves as a theoretical performance upper bound.
The Spindle execution planner preserves most of the op-
timum property when finding the practical solution (e.g.,
Cond. (10a) (10b)), but still introducing minor biases (e.g.,
8 16 32 64
Number of GPUs
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time
Cost
of
Execution
Planning
(s)
CLIP-4Tasks
CLIP-7Tasks
CLIP-10Tasks
OFASys-4Tasks
OFASys-7Tasks
QWen-VAL-3Tasks
Figure 12. Time cost (s) of Spindle’s execution planner.
reinstating 𝑙′𝑠 to integers in §3.3, resource extension in §3.4).
In Fig. 11, we find that across various configurations, the
deviation between Spindle and theoretical optimum is consis-
tently low, below 7%. This observation underscores the effec-
tiveness of Spindle in offering a practical and near-optimal
execution plan for MT MM models.
Complexity Analysis. We briefly analyze the complexity
of execution planner. Given MetaOps’ scalability curves, the
planning process consists of three parts: resource allocation,
wavefront scheduling, and device placement. Among the first
two parts, most of the time is spent on solving the continu-
ous optimization problem via bisection search (Appendix B).
In comparison, the complexity of wavefront scheduling is
relatively small, scaling linearly with the number of waves,
which is at most twice the number of MetaOps. This is be-
cause each wave consumes all layers of at least one ASL-tuple
(§3.4 3
○), while each MetaOp produces two ASL-tuples (§3.3
bi-point discretized allocation). The third part, device place-
ment, uses a constrained-depth recursive search with simple
heuristics. The searching time may vary, but is generally
within an acceptable range. As shown in Fig. 12, Spindle
effectively generates the execution plans within 3 seconds
across all experiments. Moreover, the plan will only be re-
generated when input data workload changes, which is not
very often compared to the overall training process.
More Experimental Results. Due to the space constraint,
we put more experimental results and analysis in the Ap-
pendix, including more details of experimental workloads
in Appendix C, evaluation of dynamicity performance in
Appendix D, larger-scale simulations in Appendix E, com-
parison on single-task multi-modal (STMM) workloads in
Appendix F, memory consumption analysis in Appendix G,
and system implementation performance evaluation in Ap-
pendix H. Please kindly refer to our Appendix for more
details.
6 Related Works
Cluster Scheduling for DL Jobs. GPU clusters often design
cluster schedulers to coordinate resource allocation and the
12
execution order among multiple DL jobs. Some cluster sched-
ulers [23, 78] allocate resources to jobs based directly on user-
specified requirements. Others [35, 41, 45, 49, 53, 54, 79, 85]
automatically allocate resources to each job based on the job
scalability to the computing resource, many of them minimiz-
ing job completion time (JCT). For instance, Optimus [53]
introduces the marginal gain to guide resource allocation,
aiming to minimize job completion time. Here, we highlight
the difference of these works and MT MM model training.
Unlike the independence among jobs in cluster scheduling,
MT MM training involves execution dependencies among
tasks. Furthermore, while traditional scheduling focuses on
job-level allocation, MT MM training requires finer-grained
strategies to address intra-task workload heterogeneity.
Training Optimization on Heterogeneous Cluster. This
line of research focuses on optimizing the distributed train-
ing efficiency of DL models on heterogeneous GPU clus-
ters [30, 32, 42, 43, 52, 65]. While these works primarily
concentrate on optimizing single model training and address
hardware heterogeneity, Spindle mainly focus on more com-
plex MT MM models, and addresses the challenges posed by
the workload heterogeneity of MT MM models.
7 Conclusion
Efficient training of MT MM models faces significant system
challenges due to the workload heterogeneity and complex
execution dependency. In this paper, we proposed Spindle to
facilitate efficient training of MT MM models via wavefront
scheduling, which jointly optimizes heterogeneity-aware
workload parallelization and dependency-driven execution
scheduling. Extensive experiments demonstrate the consis-
tent superior performance of Spindle, outperforming existing
SOTA training systems with speedup ratio up to 71%.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by National Science and Technology
Major Project (2022ZD0116315), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U23B2048, 62402011), Beijing Munic-
ipal Science and Technology Project (Z231100010323002),
China National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Tal-
ents (BX20230012), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(2024M750103), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (4244080),
research grant No. IPT-2024JK29, Alibaba-PKU joint pro-
gram, and High-performance Computing Platform of Peking
University. Fangcheng Fu, Xupeng Miao and Bin Cui are the
corresponding authors.
References
[1] 2024. Introducing Meta Llama 3: The most capable openly available
LLM to date. https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/.
[2] 2025. Spindle Appendix. https://github.com/AFDWang/ASPLOS25-
Spindle-Supplemental-Material/blob/main/Appendix.pdf.
[3] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge
Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt,
Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
[4] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech,
Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Mil-
lican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Mon-
teiro, Jacob L. Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Ne-
matzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Bar-
reira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karén Simonyan. 2022.
Flamingo: a Visual Language Model for Few-Shot Learning. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022,
New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, Sanmi
Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and
A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
960a172bc7fbf0177ccccbb411a7d800-Abstract-Conference.html
[5] Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac,
Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth,
Katie Millican, David Silver, Slav Petrov, Melvin Johnson, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily
Pitler, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James
Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul Ronald Barham, Tom Hennigan, Ben-
jamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan Do-
herty, Eli Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira,
Kareem Ayoub, Megha Goel, George Tucker, Enrique Piqueras, Maxim
Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Danihelka, Becca Roelofs, Anaïs
White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati,
Mehran Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski,
and et al. 2023. Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal
Models. CoRR abs/2312.11805 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2312.11805
arXiv:2312.11805
[6] Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario
Lucic, and Cordelia Schmid. 2021. ViViT: A Video Vision Transformer.
In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV
2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021. IEEE, 6816–6826.
doi:10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00676
[7] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael
Auli. 2020. wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learn-
ing of Speech Representations. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, Hugo
Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
and Hsuan-Tien Lin (Eds.). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2020/hash/92d1e1eb1cd6f9fba3227870bb6d7f07-Abstract.html
[8] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng
Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Qwen-
VL: A Frontier Large Vision-Language Model with Versatile Abili-
ties. CoRR abs/2308.12966 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2308.12966
arXiv:2308.12966
[9] Jinze Bai, Rui Men, Hao Yang, Xuancheng Ren, Kai Dang, Yichang
Zhang, Xiaohuan Zhou, Peng Wang, Sinan Tan, An Yang, Zeyu Cui,
Yu Han, Shuai Bai, Wenbin Ge, Jianxin Ma, Junyang Lin, Jingren Zhou,
and Chang Zhou. 2022. OFASys: A Multi-Modal Multi-Task Learning
System for Building Generalist Models. CoRR abs/2212.04408 (2022).
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2212.04408 arXiv:2212.04408
[10] Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. 2022. BEiT:
BERT Pre-Training of Image Transformers. In The Tenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April
25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=p-
BhZSz59o4
[11] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
13
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot
Learners. In NeurIPS.
[12] Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016.
Training Deep Nets with Sublinear Memory Cost. CoRR abs/1604.06174
(2016). arXiv:1604.06174 http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06174
[13] Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Hao Tian, Shenglong Ye, Zhangwei Gao,
Erfei Cui, Wenwen Tong, Kongzhi Hu, Jiapeng Luo, Zheng Ma, Ji Ma,
Jiaqi Wang, Xiaoyi Dong, Hang Yan, Hewei Guo, Conghui He, Botian
Shi, Zhenjiang Jin, Chao Xu, Bin Wang, Xingjian Wei, Wei Li, Wenjian
Zhang, Bo Zhang, Pinlong Cai, Licheng Wen, Xiangchao Yan, Min
Dou, Lewei Lu, Xizhou Zhu, Tong Lu, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, Jifeng Dai,
and Wenhai Wang. 2024. How far are we to GPT-4V? Closing the gap
to commercial multimodal models with open-source suites. Sci. China
Inf. Sci. 67, 220101 (2024). doi:10.1007/s11432-024-4231-5
[14] Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Xiaohuan Zhou, Qian Yang, Shiliang Zhang, Zhijie
Yan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Qwen-Audio: Advanc-
ing Universal Audio Understanding via Unified Large-Scale Audio-
Language Models. CoRR abs/2311.07919 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.
2311.07919 arXiv:2311.07919
[15] Tri Dao. 2023. FlashAttention-2: Faster Attention with Better Paral-
lelism and Work Partitioning. CoRR abs/2307.08691 (2023). doi:10.
48550/ARXIV.2307.08691 arXiv:2307.08691
[16] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
2022. FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with
IO-Awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022,
NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022,
Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho,
and A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
67d57c32e20fd0a7a302cb81d36e40d5-Abstract-Conference.html
[17] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding. In NAACL-HLT. 4171–4186.
[18] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. 2021.
An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition
at Scale. In ICLR.
[19] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan
Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet,
Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Haus-
man, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and
Pete Florence. 2023. PaLM-E: An Embodied Multimodal Language
Model. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023,
23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA (Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research, Vol. 202), Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.).
PMLR, 8469–8488. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/driess23a.html
[20] Maciej Drozdowski. 2009. Scheduling for Parallel Processing (1st ed.).
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated.
[21] Hao Feng, Qi Liu, Hao Liu, Jingqun Tang, Wengang Zhou, Houqiang
Li, and Can Huang. 2024. DocPedia: unleashing the power of large
multimodal model in the frequency domain for versatile document
understanding. Sci. China Inf. Sci. 67, 220106 (2024). doi:10.1007/
s11432-024-4250-y
[22] Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh,
Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand Joulin, and Ishan Misra. 2023. Image-
Bind One Embedding Space to Bind Them All. In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2023, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, June 17-24, 2023. IEEE, 15180–15190. doi:10.1109/CVPR52729.
2023.01457
[23] Juncheng Gu, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Kang G. Shin, Yibo Zhu, Myeong-
jae Jeon, Junjie Qian, Hongqiang Harry Liu, and Chuanxiong Guo.
2019. Tiresias: A GPU Cluster Manager for Distributed Deep Learn-
ing. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation, NSDI 2019, Boston, MA, February 26-28, 2019, Jay R.
Lorch and Minlan Yu (Eds.). USENIX Association, 485–500. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/gu
[24] Lei Guan, Dong-Sheng Li, Jiye Liang, Wen-Jian Wang, Ke-shi Ge, and
Xicheng Lu. 2024. Advances of Pipeline Model Parallelism for Deep
Learning Training: An Overview. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 39, 3 (2024),
567–584. doi:10.1007/S11390-024-3872-3
[25] Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel.
2022. Audioclip: Extending Clip to Image, Text and Audio. In IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
ICASSP 2022, Virtual and Singapore, 23-27 May 2022. IEEE, 976–980.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9747631
[26] Roger W. Hockney. 1994. The Communication Challenge for MPP:
Intel Paragon and Meiko CS-2. Parallel Comput. 20, 3 (1994), 389–398.
doi:10.1016/S0167-8191(06)80021-9
[27] Jun Huang, Zhen Zhang, Shuai Zheng, Feng Qin, and Yida Wang.
2024. {DISTMM}: Accelerating Distributed Multimodal Model Train-
ing. In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 24). 1157–1171.
[28] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, et al. 2019. GPipe:
Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks using Pipeline Parallelism.
In NeurIPS.
[29] Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu
Pham, Quoc V. Le, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. 2021.
Scaling Up Visual and Vision-Language Representation Learning With
Noisy Text Supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 139), Marina Meila and
Tong Zhang (Eds.). PMLR, 4904–4916. http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v139/jia21b.html
[30] Xianyan Jia, Le Jiang, Ang Wang, Wencong Xiao, Ziji Shi, Jie Zhang,
Xinyuan Li, Langshi Chen, Yong Li, Zhen Zheng, et al. 2022. Whale:
Efficient giant model training over heterogeneous {GPUs}. In 2022
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 22). 673–688.
[31] Zhihao Jia, Matei Zaharia, and Alex Aiken. 2019. Beyond Data and
Model Parallelism for Deep Neural Networks. In MLSys.
[32] Dacheng Li, Hongyi Wang, Eric P. Xing, and Hao Zhang. 2022. AMP:
Automatically Finding Model Parallel Strategies with Heterogeneity
Awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022,
NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022,
Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho,
and A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
2b4bfa1cebe78d125fefd7ea6ffcfc6d-Abstract-Conference.html
[33] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2023. BLIP-
2: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training with Frozen Image
Encoders and Large Language Models. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii,
USA (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 202), Andreas
Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 19730–19742. https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v202/li23q.html
[34] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2022.
BLIP: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training for Unified Vision-
Language Understanding and Generation. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162), Kamalika
Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu,
and Sivan Sabato (Eds.). PMLR, 12888–12900. https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v162/li22n.html
[35] Jiamin Li, Hong Xu, Yibo Zhu, Zherui Liu, Chuanxiong Guo, and
Cong Wang. 2023. Lyra: Elastic scheduling for deep learning clusters.
14
In Proceedings of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer
Systems. 835–850.
[36] Shen Li, Yanli Zhao, Rohan Varma, Omkar Salpekar, Pieter Noordhuis,
Teng Li, Adam Paszke, Jeff Smith, Brian Vaughan, Pritam Damania,
and Soumith Chintala. 2020. PyTorch Distributed: Experiences on
Accelerating Data Parallel Training. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 12 (2020),
3005–3018. doi:10.14778/3415478.3415530
[37] Dongyang Liu, Renrui Zhang, Longtian Qiu, Siyuan Huang, Weifeng
Lin, Shitian Zhao, Shijie Geng, Ziyi Lin, Peng Jin, Kaipeng Zhang,
Wenqi Shao, Chao Xu, Conghui He, Junjun He, Hao Shao, Pan Lu, Yu
Qiao, Hongsheng Li, and Peng Gao. 2024. SPHINX-X: scaling data
and parameters for a family of multi-modal large language models. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
(Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24). JMLR.org, Article 1314, 21 pages.
[38] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
2023. Visual Instruction Tuning. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Or-
leans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-
mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey
Levine (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
6dcf277ea32ce3288914faf369fe6de0-Abstract-Conference.html
[39] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang,
Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. 2021. Swin Transformer: Hierarchical
Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows. In ICCV. IEEE, 9992–
10002.
[40] Jiasen Lu, Christopher Clark, Rowan Zellers, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and
Aniruddha Kembhavi. 2023. UNIFIED-IO: A Unified Model for Vision,
Language, and Multi-modal Tasks. In The Eleventh International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
2023. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=E01k9048soZ
[41] Kshiteej Mahajan, Arjun Balasubramanian, Arjun Singhvi, Shivaram
Venkataraman, Aditya Akella, Amar Phanishayee, and Shuchi Chawla.
2020. Themis: Fair and Efficient GPU Cluster Scheduling. In 17th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementa-
tion, NSDI 2020, Santa Clara, CA, USA, February 25-27, 2020, Ranjita
Bhagwan and George Porter (Eds.). USENIX Association, 289–304.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20/presentation/mahajan
[42] Xupeng Miao, Xiaonan Nie, Yingxia Shao, Zhi Yang, Jiawei Jiang,
Lingxiao Ma, and Bin Cui. 2021. Heterogeneity-Aware Distributed
Machine Learning Training via Partial Reduce. In SIGMOD. ACM,
2262–2270.
[43] Xupeng Miao, Yining Shi, Zhi Yang, Bin Cui, and Zhihao Jia. 2023.
SDPipe: A Semi-Decentralized Framework for Heterogeneity-aware
Pipeline-parallel Training. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 9 (2023), 2354–2363.
doi:10.14778/3598581.3598604
[44] Xupeng Miao, Yujie Wang, Youhe Jiang, Chunan Shi, Xiaonan Nie,
Hailin Zhang, and Bin Cui. 2022. Galvatron: Efficient Transformer
Training over Multiple GPUs Using Automatic Parallelism. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 16, 3 (2022), 470–479. doi:10.14778/3570690.3570697
[45] Zizhao Mo, Huanle Xu, and Chengzhong Xu. 2024. Heet: Acceler-
ating Elastic Training in Heterogeneous Deep Learning Clusters. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2.
499–513.
[46] Seungwhan Moon, Andrea Madotto, Zhaojiang Lin, Tushar Nagarajan,
Matt Smith, Shashank Jain, Chun-Fu Yeh, Prakash Murugesan, Peyman
Heidari, Yue Liu, Kavya Srinet, Babak Damavandi, and Anuj Kumar.
2023. AnyMAL: An Efficient and Scalable Any-Modality Augmented
Language Model. CoRR abs/2309.16058 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.
2309.16058 arXiv:2309.16058
[47] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri,
Nikhil R. Devanur, Gregory R. Ganger, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Matei
Zaharia. 2019. PipeDream: generalized pipeline parallelism for DNN
training. In SOSP. 1–15.
[48] Deepak Narayanan, Amar Phanishayee, Kaiyu Shi, Xie Chen, and
Matei Zaharia. 2021. Memory-efficient pipeline-parallel dnn training.
In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 7937–7947.
[49] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar
Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Heterogeneity-Aware Clus-
ter Scheduling Policies for Deep Learning Workloads. In 14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
OSDI 2020, Virtual Event, November 4-6, 2020. USENIX Association,
481–498. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/
narayanan-deepak
[50] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, et al. 2021.
Efficient large-scale language model training on GPU clusters using
megatron-LM. In SC. ACM, 58:1–58:15.
[51] OpenAI. 2023. ChatGPT. https://chat.openai.com/chat.
[52] Jay H. Park, Gyeongchan Yun, Chang M. Yi, Nguyen T. Nguyen, Seung-
min Lee, Jaesik Choi, Sam H. Noh, and Young-ri Choi. 2020. HetPipe:
Enabling Large DNN Training on (Whimpy) Heterogeneous GPU
Clusters through Integration of Pipelined Model Parallelism and Data
Parallelism. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX
ATC 2020, July 15-17, 2020, Ada Gavrilovska and Erez Zadok (Eds.).
USENIX Association, 307–321. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc20/presentation/park
[53] Yanghua Peng, Yixin Bao, Yangrui Chen, Chuan Wu, and Chuanxiong
Guo. 2018. Optimus: an efficient dynamic resource scheduler for deep
learning clusters. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference,
EuroSys 2018, Porto, Portugal, April 23-26, 2018, Rui Oliveira, Pascal
Felber, and Y. Charlie Hu (Eds.). ACM, 3:1–3:14. doi:10.1145/3190508.
3190517
[54] Aurick Qiao, Sang Keun Choe, Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Willie
Neiswanger, Qirong Ho, Hao Zhang, Gregory R. Ganger, and Eric P.
Xing. 2021. Pollux: Co-adaptive Cluster Scheduling for Goodput-
Optimized Deep Learning. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Operat-
ing Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2021, July 14-16, 2021,
Angela Demke Brown and Jay R. Lorch (Eds.). USENIX Association.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi21/presentation/qiao
[55] Xueyang Qin, Lishuang Li, Jingyao Tang, Fei Hao, Meiling Ge, and
Guangyao Pang. 2024. Multi-Task Visual Semantic Embedding Net-
work for Image-Text Retrieval. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 39, 4 (2024),
811–826. doi:10.1007/S11390-024-4125-1
[56] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, et al. 2021. Learning
Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In
ICML, Vol. 139. PMLR, 8748–8763.
[57] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine
McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust Speech Recognition
via Large-Scale Weak Supervision. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii,
USA (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 202), Andreas
Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 28492–28518. https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v202/radford23a.html
[58] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
2018. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.
(2018).
[59] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei,
Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multi-
task learners. OpenAI blog 1, 8 (2019), 9.
[60] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan
Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020.
Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text
Transformer. JMLR (2020).
[61] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
2020. ZeRO: memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter
models. In SC. IEEE/ACM.
15
[62] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
2020. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning
models with over 100 billion parameters. In SIGKDD. 3505–3506.
[63] Scott E. Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Col-
menarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez,
Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake
Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen,
Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas.
2022. A Generalist Agent. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2022 (2022).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=1ikK0kHjvj
[64] Jie Ren, Samyam Rajbhandari, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Olatunji
Ruwase, Shuangyan Yang, Minjia Zhang, Dong Li, and Yuxiong He.
2021. ZeRO-Offload: Democratizing Billion-Scale Model Training. In
2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC 2021, July 14-
16, 2021, Irina Calciu and Geoff Kuenning (Eds.). USENIX Association,
551–564. https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc21/presentation/ren-
jie
[65] Linghao Song, Fan Chen, Youwei Zhuo, Xuehai Qian, Hai Li, and
Yiran Chen. 2020. AccPar: Tensor Partitioning for Heterogeneous
Deep Learning Accelerators. In IEEE International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA 2020, San Diego, CA, USA,
February 22-26, 2020. IEEE, 342–355. doi:10.1109/HPCA47549.2020.
00036
[66] Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. 2022.
VideoMAE: Masked Autoencoders are Data-Efficient Learners
for Self-Supervised Video Pre-Training. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New
Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, Sanmi
Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and
A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
416f9cb3276121c42eebb86352a4354a-Abstract-Conference.html
[67] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric
Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient
Foundation Language Models. CoRR abs/2302.13971 (2023). doi:10.
48550/ARXIV.2302.13971 arXiv:2302.13971
[68] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Alma-
hairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal
Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton-
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes,
Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami,
Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann,
Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut
Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier
Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie,
Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xi-
ang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela
Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez, Robert
Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open
Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. CoRR abs/2307.09288 (2023).
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2307.09288 arXiv:2307.09288
[69] Colin Unger, Zhihao Jia, Wei Wu, et al. 2022. Unity: Accelerating DNN
Training Through Joint Optimization of Algebraic Transformations
and Parallelization. In OSDI. 267–284.
[70] Changhan Wang, Anne Wu, Juan Pino, Alexei Baevski, Michael Auli,
and Alexis Conneau. 2021. Large-Scale Self- and Semi-Supervised
Learning for Speech Translation. In Interspeech 2021, 22nd Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
Brno, Czechia, 30 August - 3 September 2021, Hynek Hermansky, Honza
Cernocký, Lukás Burget, Lori Lamel, Odette Scharenborg, and Petr
Motlícek (Eds.). ISCA, 2242–2246. doi:10.21437/INTERSPEECH.2021-
1912
[71] Guozheng Wang, Yongmei Lei, Zeyu Zhang, and Cunlu Peng. 2023. A
Communication Efficient ADMM-based Distributed Algorithm Using
Two-Dimensional Torus Grouping AllReduce. Data Sci. Eng. 8, 1 (2023),
61–72. doi:10.1007/S41019-022-00202-7
[72] Guanhua Wang, Heyang Qin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Connor Holmes,
Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, Feng Yan, Lei Yang, and
Yuxiong He. 2023. ZeRO++: Extremely Efficient Collective Com-
munication for Giant Model Training. CoRR abs/2306.10209 (2023).
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2306.10209 arXiv:2306.10209
[73] Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Zhikang
Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. 2022.
OFA: Unifying Architectures, Tasks, and Modalities Through a Simple
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning Framework. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162),
Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári,
Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (Eds.). PMLR, 23318–23340. https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wang22al.html
[74] Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng,
Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal, Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal,
Subhojit Som, and Furu Wei. 2023. Image as a Foreign Language:
BEIT Pretraining for Vision and Vision-Language Tasks. In IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2023,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 17-24, 2023. IEEE, 19175–19186. doi:10.
1109/CVPR52729.2023.01838
[75] Yujie Wang, Youhe Jiang, Xupeng Miao, Fangcheng Fu, Shenhan Zhu,
Xiaonan Nie, Yaofeng Tu, and Bin Cui. 2024. Improving Automatic
Parallel Training via Balanced Memory Workload Optimization. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2024).
[76] Jan Weglarz. 1981. Project Scheduling with Continuously-Divisible,
Doubly Constrained Resources. Manage. Sci. 27, 9 (sep 1981),
1040–1053. doi:10.1287/mnsc.27.9.1040
[77] Jan Weglarz. 1982. Modelling and control of dynamic resource alloca-
tion project scheduling systems. Optimization and Control of Dynamic
Operational Research Models (1982), 105–140.
[78] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian
Sivathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han, Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng,
Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang, Fan Yang, and Lidong Zhou. 2018. Gan-
diva: Introspective Cluster Scheduling for Deep Learning. In 13th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementa-
tion, OSDI 2018, Carlsbad, CA, USA, October 8-10, 2018, Andrea C.
Arpaci-Dusseau and Geoff Voelker (Eds.). USENIX Association, 595–
610. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/xiao
[79] Wencong Xiao, Shiru Ren, Yong Li, Yang Zhang, Pengyang Hou, Zhi Li,
Yihui Feng, Wei Lin, and Yangqing Jia. 2020. AntMan: Dynamic Scaling
on GPU Clusters for Deep Learning. In 14th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2020, Virtual Event,
November 4-6, 2020. USENIX Association, 533–548. https://www.
usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/xiao
[80] Hu Xu, Gargi Ghosh, Po-Yao Huang, Dmytro Okhonko, Armen Agha-
janyan, Florian Metze, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichten-
hofer. 2021. VideoCLIP: Contrastive Pre-training for Zero-shot Video-
Text Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Vir-
tual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021,
Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
tau Yih (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 6787–6800.
doi:10.18653/V1/2021.EMNLP-MAIN.544
[81] Mengying Xu, Linyin Luo, Hanjiang Lai, and Jian Yin. 2024. Category-
Level Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Hashing in Cross-Modal
Retrieval. Data Sci. Eng. 9, 3 (2024), 251–263. doi:10.1007/S41019-024-
00248-9
16
[82] Zhewei Yao, Xiaoxia Wu, Conglong Li, Minjia Zhang, Heyang Qin,
Olatunji Ruwase, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Samyam Rajbhandari, and
Yuxiong He. 2023. DeepSpeed-VisualChat: Multi-Round Multi-Image
Interleave Chat via Multi-Modal Causal Attention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.14327 (2023).
[83] Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyed-
hosseini, and Yonghui Wu. 2022. CoCa: Contrastive Captioners are
Image-Text Foundation Models. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2022 (2022).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ee277P3AYC
[84] Lu Yuan, Dongdong Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Noel Codella, Xiyang Dai,
Jianfeng Gao, Houdong Hu, Xuedong Huang, Boxin Li, Chunyuan
Li, Ce Liu, Mengchen Liu, Zicheng Liu, Yumao Lu, Yu Shi, Lijuan
Wang, Jianfeng Wang, Bin Xiao, Zhen Xiao, Jianwei Yang, Michael
Zeng, Luowei Zhou, and Pengchuan Zhang. 2021. Florence: A New
Foundation Model for Computer Vision. CoRR abs/2111.11432 (2021).
arXiv:2111.11432 https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.11432
[85] Haoyu Zhang, Logan Stafman, Andrew Or, and Michael J. Freedman.
2017. SLAQ: quality-driven scheduling for distributed machine learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2017 Symposium on Cloud Computing, SoCC
2017, Santa Clara, CA, USA, September 24-27, 2017. ACM, 390–404.
doi:10.1145/3127479.3127490
[86] Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang,
Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer,
Alban Desmaison, Can Balioglu, Pritam Damania, Bernard Nguyen,
Geeta Chauhan, Yuchen Hao, Ajit Mathews, and Shen Li. 2023. Py-
Torch FSDP: Experiences on Scaling Fully Sharded Data Parallel. Proc.
VLDB Endow. 16, 12 (2023), 3848–3860. doi:10.14778/3611540.3611569
[87] Lianmin Zheng, Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhifeng
Chen, Yanping Huang, Yida Wang, Yuanzhong Xu, Danyang Zhuo,
Eric P. Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2022. Alpa: Automat-
ing Inter- and Intra-Operator Parallelism for Distributed Deep Learn-
ing. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Im-
plementation, OSDI 2022, Carlsbad, CA, USA, July 11-13, 2022, Marcos K.
Aguilera and Hakim Weatherspoon (Eds.). USENIX Association, 559–
578. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/zheng-
lianmin
[88] Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elho-
seiny. 2023. MiniGPT-4: Enhancing Vision-Language Understanding
with Advanced Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2304.10592 (2023).
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2304.10592 arXiv:2304.10592
17
A Details of Scalability Estimator
Spindle characterizes the execution time of MetaOp 𝑚 over
𝑛 devices, 𝑇𝑚 (𝑛), by a generalized piecewise 𝛼9𝛽 function:
𝑇𝑚 (𝑛) = 𝛼𝑚,𝑖+𝛽𝑚,𝑖 × 𝑐𝑚+𝛽′
𝑚,𝑖 × 𝑤𝑚/𝑛, ∀𝑛 ∈ [𝑛𝑖−1,𝑛𝑖],𝑖 = 1, . . . ,𝑘
where 𝑘 is the number of pieces, 𝛼𝑚,𝑖 represents the co-
efficient of fixed overheads (e.g., kernel launch costs), 𝛽𝑚,𝑖
and 𝛽′
𝑚,𝑖 represent the reciprocal of execution efficiency (e.g.,
GPU computation speed and network bandwidth), 𝑤𝑚/𝑛 de-
notes the distributed workload of MetaOp𝑚 across 𝑛 devices
(e.g., computational workload), and 𝑐𝑚 denotes the workload
that doesn’t scale with 𝑛 (e.g., communication volume of data
parallelism). Such piecewise function indicates that under
varying resource scales, due to changes in the per-device
workload, coefficients such as 𝛼, 𝛽 and 𝛽′ might differ, as the
invoked kernels may vary across different workloads.
B Details of Bisection Search for Optimum
of Continuous Problem
Alg. 2 illustrates our bisection search algorithm to solve the
optimum of malleable project scheduling problem, MPSP.
The function Find_Inverse_Value(𝑇𝑚, e
𝐶 =
e
𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑑
𝐿𝑚
) finds
the value of 𝑇-1
𝑚 (e
𝐶). It first finds the closest valid alloca-
tions of MetaOp 𝑚, denoted as 𝑛𝑚 and 𝑛𝑚, such that e
𝐶 ∈
[𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚),𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚)]. It then returns
𝑛𝑚 =
(e
𝐶 −𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚)) · 𝑛𝑚 + (𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚) − e
𝐶) · 𝑛𝑚
𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚) −𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚)
, (11)
which is the linear combination of𝑛𝑚,𝑛𝑚 such that𝑇𝑚 (𝑛𝑚) =
e
𝐶.
Algorithm 2: Bisection Search for MPSP
Input: # Devices 𝑁,
linear-piecewise execution time functions {𝑇𝑚}𝑀
𝑚=1
Output: Optimum 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 = {𝑚 → ⟨𝑛∗
𝑚, 0, 𝐿𝑚⟩}𝑀
𝑚=1
1 T
𝑚𝑖𝑛, T
𝑚𝑎𝑥 ← {𝑇𝑚 (𝑁) · 𝐿𝑚}𝑀
𝑚=1, {𝑇𝑚 (1) · 𝐿𝑚};
2 e
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑤, e
𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ← max T
𝑚𝑖𝑛, sum T
𝑚𝑎𝑥 ;
3 while e
𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ − e
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑤 > 𝜀 do
4 e
𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑑 ← (e
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑤 + e
𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ)/2;
5 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 ← {𝑚 → Find_Inverse_Value(𝑇𝑚,
e
𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑑
𝐿𝑚
))}𝑀
𝑚=1;
6 if sum of allocations in 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃 < 𝑁 then
7 e
𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ← e
𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑑;
8 else
9 e
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑤 ← e
𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑑;
10 return 𝑃𝑀𝑃𝑆𝑃
C Details of Experimental Workloads
Here, we introduce our experimental workloads in detail.
(1) Multitask-CLIP: Multitask-CLIP is a generalized ver-
sion of CLIP [56], which extends CLIP to 6 modalities and
multiple contrastive learning tasks of paired data modalities.
We utilize the same model structure and configuration of
ImageBind [22]. We select 6 modalities as ImageBind, in-
cluding text, vision, audio, motion, thermal, and depth, and
select 10 different multi-modal contrastive learning tasks for
evaluation, each with distinct workloads. Each task activates
two modality encoders simultaneously without data flow
dependency.
(2) OFASys: OFASys [9] is a more general MT MM training
workload, allowing modalities and tasks to activate the model
components flexibly as needed. OFASys supports multiple
modalities, such as text, vision, audio, motion, box, structure,
and supports various multi-modal tasks, such as text summa-
rization, image captioning, visual grounding, speech recogni-
tion, text-to-SQL and etc. OFASys utilizes modality-specific
adaptors for different modalities, e.g., ViT for vision data,
and adopts a unified encoder-decoder LM with generative
loss. We select 7 different multi-modal tasks for evaluation.
(3) QWen-VAL: QWen-VAL is a larger-scale MT MM model
with up to 9.25 billion parameters, supporting three modal-
ities, including text, vision, and audio. It adopts the same
structure and configuration of the popular open-sourced
multi-modal LLMs, QWen-VL [8] and QWen-Audio [14]. It
has modality encoders for audio and vision, and the extracted
modality-specific features are combined with text tokens and
together fed into the unified LLM, QWen [? ]. We select three
tasks for evaluation, i.e., vision-language (VL) task, audio-
language (AL) task, and vision-audio-language (VAL) task,
representing different combinations of modalities.
D Dynamicity Performance
0 50 100 150 200
Iterations (103)
0
25
50
75
100
125
Total
Time
(10
3
s)
Multitask-CLIP
0 20 40 60 80 100
Iterations (103)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
OFASys
Spindle
Spindle-Optimus
DistMM-MT
Megatron-LM
DeepSpeed
Figure 13. Comparison on dynamic multi-task workloads.
Dots on the curve mark the points when the multi-task work-
load changes.
We evaluate the performance of various systems during
dynamic changes of the multi-task workloads, a common oc-
currence in MT MM training. For instance, tasks with fewer
training data may exit early, and new tasks may join partway
through training. We simulate these dynamic changes by al-
tering the training task set. When the multi-task workloads
18
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs) 4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
50
100
150
200
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1.48×
1.31×
1.48×
1.04×
1.09×
1.06×
1.46×
1.31×
1.48×
1.13×
1.09×
1.13×
1×
1×
1×
Multitask-CLIP 1 Task
Spindle
Spindle-Optimus
DistMM-MT
Megatron-LM
DeepSpeed
Figure 14. End-to-end performance comparison for Spindle
and baseline systems on 1-task Multitask-CLIP workload.
change, the current model is first saved, and the new set
of tasks and the saved model is loaded to continue training.
Fig. 13 illustrates the performance of each system under such
conditions. Spindle consistently achieves optimal training
efficiency and the shortest overall training time. This advan-
tage is due to Spindle’s adaptability to dynamically changing
workloads, enabling it to adopt an appropriate execution
plan for the efficient training of MT MM models.
E Larger-scale Simulations
We further conduct evaluation on larger-scale QWen-VAL
models (i.e., 30B, 70B). Due to the lack of massive scale re-
sources, we use the simulation-based approach to estimate
the system performance on larger cluster with 256 GPUs. The
speedup ratio of each system compared to DeepSpeed is sum-
marized in Tab. 2. As can be seen, on larger-scale models and
clusters, Spindle consistently achieves a substantial speedup
of over 1.3× compared to DeepSpeed, validating its scalabil-
ity w.r.t model size. In contrast, other competiters achieve
speedups of less than 1.1× compared to DeepSpeed. Besides,
we also want to clarify that MT MM models within 10B are
popular and widely deployed in real-world applications (e.g.,
BLIP-2 [33], MiniGPT-4 [88], QWen-Audio [14], DeepSeek-
VL [? ]). Their popularity is not only because many of them
are open-source, but also because the required hardware is
more accessible in the real world.
Table 2. Simulated iteration time speedup over DeepSpeed
on larger-scale QWen-VAL workloads (3 Tasks) and larger-
scale clusters (256 GPUs).
Systems QWen-VAL 30B QWen-VAL 70B
Spindle 1.34× 1.36×
Spindle-Optimus 1.05× 1.09×
DistMM-MT 1.04× 1.04×
DeepSpeed 1× 1×
F Comparison on Single-Task Multi-Modal
Workload
We also compare Spindle with baseline systems on single-
task (ST) multi-modal (MT) scenario, which is a special case
of MT MM training, as shown in Fig. 14. We are pleased
to observe that even in the single-task scenario, Spindle
outperformed SOTA systems by up to 48%. This is attrib-
uted to Spindle’s fine-grained, operator-level resource alloca-
tion and scheduling, which recognize not only the inter-task
workload heterogeneity but also intra-task operator work-
load variations — a capability beyond the reach of task-level
strategies as well as SOTA systems. It’s worth noting that
DistMM-MT has similar performance to Spindle on ST MM
scenario, which is reasonable, as DistMM-MT is specifically
designed for single-task multi-modal workloads.
G Memory Consumption
We also conduct a comparative analysis of memory con-
sumption between Spindle and the other competitors. Fig. 15
depicts the memory usage for each device in the scenario
of Multitask-CLIP (4 tasks, 16 GPUs). Our findings indicate
that Spindle generally exhibits lower memory consumption
than SOTA systems such as Megatron-LM and DeepSpeed.
This efficiency stems from Spindle’s operator-level strategy
and selective parameter storage feature, where only devices
that activate a specific operator need to maintain its corre-
sponding parameters, thereby minimizing redundant storage.
Additionally, we’ve observed that task-level strategy Spindle-
Optimus experiences significant memory imbalances. In con-
trast, Spindle maintains an excellent balance of memory
consumption across devices, a success that is attributed to
our device placement strategies.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12 13
14
15
Device ID
0 5 10152025
Memory Consumption
Spindle
Spindle-Optimus
DistMM-MT
Megatron-LM
DeepSpeed
Figure 15. Memory consumption (GB) of each device in
Multitask-CLIP (4 tasks, 16 GPUs). Points closer to the inner
edge of the spider chart represent lower GPU peak memory
usage.
H System Implementation Performance
We validate the system implementation performance of Spin-
dle. Specifically, we implement a simple decoupled baseline
19
on Spindle, Spindle-Seq, which allocates available devices to
each task and execute tasks sequentially within each itera-
tion, similar to SOTA systems, Megatron-LM and DeepSpeed.
It reflects the implementation performance of our system
without specific optimizations for MT MM workloads, i.e.,
without Spindle’s flexible resource allocation and schedul-
ing strategies. As shown in Fig. 16, we find that Spindle-Seq
has similar system performance compared to SOTA systems
without specific optimization for MT MM workloads.
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs)4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1
×
1
×
1
.
0
3
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
5
×
1
.
0
9
×
1
×
1
×
1
×
Multitask-CLIP, 4 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs)4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
3
×
1
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
4
×
1
.
0
1
×
1
×
1
×
1
×
Multitask-CLIP, 7 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs)4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
400
800
1200
1600
3100
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
2
×
0
.
9
9
×
1
.
0
1
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
5
×
1
×
1
×
1
×
Multitask-CLIP, 10 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs)4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1
×
1
×
1
.
0
3
×
0
.
9
9
×
0
.
9
8
×
1
.
0
1
×
1
×
1
×
1
×
OFASys, 4 Tasks
1Node(8GPUs) 2Nodes(16GPUs)4Nodes(32GPUs)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Iteration
Time
(ms)
1
.
0
7
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
3
×
1
.
0
2
×
0
.
9
8
×
1
.
0
1
×
1
×
1
×
1
×
OFASys, 7 Tasks
4Nodes(32GPUs) 8Nodes(64GPUs)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
1
.
0
1
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
2
×
1
.
0
3
×
1
×
1
×
QWen-VAL 10B, 3 Tasks
Spindle-Seq Megatron-LM DeepSpeed
Figure 16. Comparison of Spindle-Seq with Megatron-LM
and DeepSpeed.
20
