  ICED: An Integrated CGR
            DVFS-Aware
       Cheng Tan†§ , Miaomiao Jiang¶§ , Deepak Patil§ , Yan
                                Hyunchul Park† , Antonin

                    † Google, § Arizona State University, ¶ Sha
                      ‡ National University of Singapore, ∗ Pa
              † {chengtan, parkhc}@google.com, § {chengtan
         ¶ {miaomiaojiang, julei}@sdu.edu.cn, ∥ yo96@corn
                                                   ∗ antonino.tume




   Abstract—Coarse-grained reconfigurable arrays (CGRAs) are
a promising solution to enable energy-efficient acceleration of
applications from different domains. By leveraging reconfigu-
ration at the functional level, they can adapt to significantly
different computational patterns. However, the relationships of
voltage and frequency with the utilization of CGRA resources
and the dynamic management of them are not well explored,
leading to inefficient designs.
   CGRAs have also been successful in accelerating data-
dependent streaming applications. However, in these applications,
the execution time of each kernel in the pipeline might dynam-
ically vary depending on the characteristics of the input. This
also leads to under-utilization of resources for the dynamically
changing kernels that do not limit the application throughput.
DVFS can also improve energy efficiency for these applications
by dynamically changing the voltage and frequency levels of tiles
that host non-performance-constraining kernels.
   This paper proposes ICED – an integrated DVFS-aware frame-
work to map applications on CGRAs that support power islands.
ICED proposes a CGRA architecture supporting DVFS islands
at varying granularity (from a single tile to a group of tiles)
and the related DVFS-aware compilation and mapping toolchain.
ICED is the first work that introduces DVFS support for
spatio-temporal CGRAs at power-island levels. The experimental
evaluation shows that ICED improves average utilization by 2.3×
and energy-efficiency by 1.32× over a conventional CGRA. With
streaming applications, ICED can achieve up to 1.26× energy-
efficiency compared with a state-of-the-art CGRA that introduces
partial dynamic reconfiguration to adapt to variations in kernels’
throughput.

                      I. I NTRODUCTION
   Coarse-grained reconfigurable arrays (CGRAs) are acceler-
ators composed of tiles, containing one or more functional
units (FU), interconnected through an on-chip network. They
usually are loosely coupled to a general-purpose central pro-
cessing unit and enable the acceleration of a variety of com-
putational patterns through their reconfigurability [21]. They
have been shown to provide energy-efficient acceleration of
applications from different domains, including machine learn-
ing (ML) [17], [38], high-performance computing (HPC) [9],
and embedded systems [15].
   With all reconfigurable devices and, in particular, with
CGRAs, the compiler infrastructures play a critical role in
