   Weeding out Front-End S
               Size Instruc
                            Roman Brunner
                 Norwegian University of Science and
                    Technology (NTNU), Norway



   Abstract—The core front-end remains a critical bottleneck in
modern server workloads owing to their multi-MB instruction
footprints stemming from deep software stacks. Prior work has
mainly investigated instruction prefetching and cache replace-
ment policies to mitigate this bottleneck. In this work, we take
an orthogonal approach and analyze instruction cache storage
efficiency. Our analysis shows that, on average, about 60% of
the bytes in a cache block are never accessed before the block
is evicted from the instruction cache. This represents a huge
storage inefficiency that more than halves the effective cache
capacity. We observe that this inefficiency is caused by the fixed
cache block sizes which are unable to accommodate the varying
spatial locality inherent in the instruction stream. To mitigate
this inefficiency, we propose Uneven Block Size (UBS) instruction
cache, which supports different cache block sizes in a cache
set. Our evaluation shows that UBS cache improves the storage
efficiency by 32 percentage points over the baseline instruction
cache. Further, by supporting uneven block sizes, UBS cache
accommodates more than twice the number of blocks than a
conventional cache within a given storage budget. Overall, the
additional blocks combined with the better storage efficiency
result in UBS cache approaching the performance of a 64KB
conventional cache on a set of server workloads while requiring
a storage budget similar to a 32KB conventional cache.

                      I. I NTRODUCTION
   Server applications have seen a continuous demand to pro-
vide increasingly more and complex functionality. Managing
this complexity necessitates implementing the functionality
through deep software stacks. For example, a typical server
request may need to touch a web server, database, storage
and network I/O, logging and monitoring code etc. Such deep
software stacks result in application code footprints reaching
tens of megabytes.
   At the microarchitectural level, such massive code footprints
overwhelm the capacity of private per-core front-end struc-
tures, such as instruction cache (L1-I), which are optimized for
low latency rather than high storage capacity. Consequently,
L1-I experiences frequent misses that stall the instruction fetch
for tens of cycles while the miss is filled from lower-level
caches. Such frequent front-end stalls severely limit instruction
delivery to the core, thus resulting in poor performance.
   Though the front-end bottleneck is a well-established prob-
lem [1]–[3], prior work has mostly explored prefetching [4]–
[9] and replacement policies [10] to address it. In this work,
we investigate an orthogonal aspect, namely cache storage effi-
ciency, to mitigate this bottleneck. We define storage efficiency
as the fraction of bytes in the L1-I that are actually accessed
