Data Consistency # OpenSHMEM defines the consistency of data in the global address space in terms
of ordering of operations and visibility of updates to symmetric objects. NVSHMEM follows the OpenSHMEM memory model. However, several important
exceptions are made to adapt OpenSHMEM to the weakly consistent memory model
provided by the GPU architecture, as noted in Differences Between NVSHMEM and OpenSHMEM . NVSHMEM provides the following methods to access local or remote symmetric memory: Remote memory access (RMA: PUT/GET) Atomic memory operations (AMO) Signal operations Direct load and store operations (for example, using a pointer that was returned by nvshmem_ptr ) Direct multimem load reduce and store broadcast operations (for example, using a pointer that was returned by nvshmemx_mc_ptr ) Collective functions (broadcast, reductions, and others) Wait and test functions (local symmetric memory only) Two operations that were issued by the same PE or different PEs, and that access the
same memory location in parallel, are in conflict when one or more of the
operations performs a write. These conflicts result in undefined behavior in the
OpenSHMEM memory model. An exception is made when the operations are a
combination of AMOs or AMOs and wait/test operations. A second exception is
made when the operations are a combination of signal updates and wait/test
operations. Updates to globally accessible objects are unordered. A PE can enforce the ordering
of its updates with respect to accesses performed by the target PE using the nvshmem_fence operation. When updates performed by a PE must be ordered or made
visible to PEs other than the target PE, use the nvshmem_quiet operation.
While updates are unordered, updates made by using NVSHMEM APIs are
guaranteed to eventually complete without any additional actions performed by
the source or the target PE. As a result, NVSHMEM guarantees that
updates will eventually become visible to other PEs through the NVSHMEM API.
Updates are also stable in the sense that after the update is visible to another API
call, the update remains until replaced by another update. This guarantees that
synchronization as described above completes in a finite amount of time. By default, all OpenSHMEM operations are unordered and the programmer must
ensure ordering by using nvshmem_fence and nvshmem_quiet operations to order
memory updates and wait/test operations to order memory reads. Barrier
operations can also be used to order updates and reads. The following
list provides additional detail on scenarios where two memory accesses by the
same PE are guaranteed to occur in order: The accesses are the result of different collective function calls that happen in program order. The first access is a wait or test call that is followed by a read operation and both operations target local symmetric memory. The accesses are the result of two different API calls or LD/ST operations and are separated by an appropriate ordering operation based on the following table: Type of first access Same target PE Different target PE Blocking Fence/quiet/barrier Quiet/barrier Non-blocking Quiet/barrier Quiet/barrier The nvshmem_quiet operation completes pending operations and
provides the following guarantees: All non-blocking operations issued by the calling PE have completed. Access to all PEs (for example, to any location in the PGAS) are ordered, so accesses that occurred before the quiet operation can be observed by all PEs as having occurred before accesses after the quiet operation. PEs must use appropriate synchronization operations, for example, wait/test operations, to observe the ordering enforced at the PE that performed the quiet operation. Ordering is guaranteed for all OpenSHMEM APIs and for direct store operations. The nvshmem_fence operation provides the following weaker guarantees and
ensures the point-to-point ordering of operations: Access to each PE (for example, to a partition of the PGAS) are ordered, so that accesses that occurred before the fence operation can be observed by the PE that is local to the corresponding partition of the PGAS as having occurred before accesses after the fence operation. PEs must use appropriate synchronization operations, for example, wait/test operations, to observe the ordering enforced at the PE that performed the fence operation. Ordering is guaranteed for all OpenSHMEM APIs, and for direct store operations.
