                          2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symp




       Leveraging Cache Cohere
                   False Sharing
                      Vipin Patel                             Swarnendu
       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur        Indian Institute of T
                   Kanpur, India                                Kanpur,
               vipinpat@cse.iitk.ac.in                    swarnendu@c



       Abstract—Performance bugs due to false sharing do not man-
   ifest as observable correctness errors, and hence are challenging
   to detect and repair. Prior approaches aim to both detect
   and repair false sharing instances automatically but most of
   them suffer from one or more of the following drawbacks:
   (i) high performance overhead due to expensive tracking of
   shadow memory, (ii) reliance on imprecise hardware events, and
   (iii) limited applicability and portability.
       We present extensions to the MESI cache coherence protocol
   for efficiently identifying and mitigating false sharing instances.
   The FSDetect protocol tracks the frequency of coherence misses
   per cache block to identify harmful instances of falsely shared
   lines while incurring negligible performance overhead. The
   FSLite protocol extends FSDetect to transparently privatize the
   falsely shared lines on accesses after detection, thereby eliminat-
   ing the performance problem arising from false sharing. FSLite
   maintains coherence by performing precise byte-level updates of
   privatized blocks at the LLC on termination of privatization.
       Our simulation results on a variety of multithreaded workloads
   show that FSDetect can precisely identify all known harmful
   instances of false sharing. FSLite, on average, improves the
   performance of applications suffering from false sharing by 1.39X
   over the unmodified baseline, at the cost of a minimal increase
   in the chip area. Furthermore, applications running with FSLite
   stress the network less and show improved energy behavior.
       Index Terms—coherence protocol, false sharing, shared mem-
   ory, performance bugs

                          I. I NTRODUCTION
      The invalidation-based coherence protocols used in mul-
   ticore architectures enforces a single-writer multiple-reader
   (SWMR) invariant, which means that, at any given time, a
   cache line can be written by only a single core but can be
   read concurrently by multiple cores [1], [2]. When multiple
   cores try to update a cache line repeatedly, the updates
   get serialized. Resolving cache line contention to keep the
   cache hierarchy coherent incurs substantial overhead since it
   requires synchronous decision-making across multiple cores,
   and is a barrier to developing efficient and scalable shared-
   memory multithreaded applications. Contended lines in a
   cache-coherent architecture ping-pong between the private
   caches of the sharing cores, hurting performance and inflating
   communication traffic. Cache line contention arises from two
   types of read-write data sharing: true sharing and false sharing.

         We acknowledge the support received from the SERB Grant
   SRG/2019/000384, TCS Research Scholar Program, and Research-I Foun-
   dation of CSE, IIT Kanpur.



2379-315/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE                                            823
DOI 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00066
