 Looking into the Black Bo
    Architecture Simulatio
                     AkitaR
                   Ali Mosallaei                                       Kath
  Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept.                Scientific Comp
             University of Michigan                                     Un
               Ann Arbor, USA                                          Salt
               alimos@umich.edu                                        kisa




   Abstract—Computer architecture simulators are essential for
validating novel chip designs. However, they often provide little
transparency during execution. This opaqueness limits the ability
of users to identify issues during the simulation, leading to
both wasted computational and human time. We address these
issues by providing an intuitive user experience during simulation
execution. Particularly, we reveal the status of executions and
allow users to control the execution of a computer architecture
simulator through AkitaRTM, an interactive web-based tool for
real-time monitoring of computer architecture simulations. We
based its design on the design workflow inefficiencies experienced
by computer architects when using simulations. We demonstrate
AkitaRTM’s utility through two case studies, the second leading
to a patch in the simulator. Additionally, we conducted a user
study with computer architects, aiming to validate AkitaRTM.
We found that, in addition to solving the observed problems,
AkitaRTM also provided an educational benefit by making
simulators more transparent to users. Based on these findings,
we reflect upon the design of AkitaRTM and provide guidance
for future human-centered tools in this space.
   Index Terms—computer architecture simulation, real-time
monitoring, debugging, user study

                         I. I NTRODUCTION
   Computer architecture simulators play a pivotal role in
developing and optimizing modern computer chips and hard-
ware [32]. These tools provide a virtual environment for
architects and developers to analyze, design, and test various
hardware configurations and instruction sets without the need
for physical prototypes. By facilitating detailed performance
analysis and design space exploration, these simulators enable
more efficient and cost-effective development cycles.
   A major problem of computer architecture simulators, as
discussed in prior work across the community [5], [26], [27],
[31], [44], is slow simulation speed. As cycle-level simulators
are usually millions of times slower than real hardware, simu-
lating one second of execution can easily last days, weeks, or
years [7], [39], [44]. This slowdown factor significantly limits
the capability of computer architecture simulators, slowing
down scientific innovation.
   The most of the work was done while Ali Mosallaei was a research intern
at William & Mary.
