    Chaining Transactions fo
    Management in Hardware
       Vı́ctor Nicolás-Conesa, Rubén Titos-Gil, Ricardo Fe

                           Computer Engineering Department, U
         Email: victor.nicolasc@um.es, rtitos@um.es, rfernande



    Abstract—Hardware Transactional Memory (HTM) offers the
opportunity to ease parallel programming. However, driven
by hardware limitations, commercial implementations eschew
the complexity involved in early sophisticated proposals from
academia, and, among other things, opt for simple conflict
resolution policies that inevitably increase transaction aborts. To
increase thread level parallelism, previous works propose conflict
resolution schemes that, instead of aborting, add a second level
of speculation consisting in using not-yet-committed data from
another transaction. This policy, which we refer to as requester-
speculates, has not yet been considered in the context of the kind
of best-effort HTM support provided by commercial processors.
    This work proposes CHAining TransactionS (CHATS), a
simple yet effective realization of the requester-speculates con-
flict resolution policy in which cyclic dependencies between
transactions are avoided and the commit ordering respects the
dependencies that transactions make once speculative values
are communicated. The ultimate result is a best-effort HTM
implementation that forces a partial order between transactions
in a way that ensures effective utilization of forwarded data
and that gets away from the complexity of previous proposals.
Simulations using gem5 demonstrate the effectiveness of CHATS
in both commercial-like setups and academic state-of-the-art
best-effort systems (22% and 16% reduction in execution time,
on average, respectively). These improvements are achieved by
requiring less than 280 bytes of extra storage.

                       I. I NTRODUCTION
   Beginning roughly two decades ago with the advent of
multicores, Hardware Transactional Memory (HTM) sparked
great interest among researchers, who picked up on the seminal
work by Herlihy and Moss [17] because of its potential
to simplify synchronization in parallel programs. The 2000s
witnessed a myriad of publications in transactional memory
(TM), where researchers attempted to broaden the kinds of
transactions supported in hardware with the goal of simpli-
fying their use as a synchronization primitive, for instance,
by accommodating large, coarse-grain transactions or ensuring
progress despite high contention. Years later, the semiconduc-
tor industry began to commercialize HTM-equipped chips [1],
[18], [20], [23], [42] that have proved significant advantages
over traditional locks in specific niches [22], [43].
   In spite of such success stories, the limitations exhibited by
most commercial HTM implementations, commonly referred
to as best-effort HTM, have prevented a broader shift away
from locks. This is because HTM support found in real-
world chips gives no assurances that a transaction will ever
