Validating JVM Compilers via Maximizing
Optimization Interactions
Zifan Xie∗†

Ming Wen∗†‡

Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China
xzff@hust.edu.cn

Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China
mwenaa@hust.edu.cn

Shiyu Qiu∗†

Hai Jin∗§

Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China
m202372059@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces the concept of optimization interaction, which refers to the practice in modern compilers where
multiple optimization phases, such as inlining, loop unrolling,
and dead code elimination, are not completed in a one-off
sequential order while being interacted instead. Therefore,
while optimizing a certain phase, the compiler needs to ensure that the results of other optimization phases will not be
disrupted, as this could lead to compiler crashes or unpredictable results. To verify whether compilers can correctly
handle the optimization process across various phases, we
propose MopFuzzer, which aims at maximizing runtime optimization interactions during fuzzing. Specifically, it encourages the JVM to perform multi-stage optimizations and
verifies the correctness of the compiler’s optimized code
through differential testing. Currently, MopFuzzer has implemented 13 mutators, and each is intended to trigger a
certain optimization behavior. Such mutators are applied
iteratively to the same program point, aiming to maximize
∗ National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System,

Services Computing Technology and System Lab, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, 430074, China
† Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, Hubei Key
Laboratory of Distributed System Security, School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, HUST, Wuhan, 430074, China
‡ Corresponding author
§ Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST, Wuhan, 430074, China
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674188

Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China
hjin@hust.edu.cn
optimization interactions. Subsequently, the testing process
is guided by a novel method based on profile data, which
records the optimization behaviors performed by the compiler. The guidance enables MopFuzzer to generate mutants
that are able to maximize optimization behaviors and their
interactions. Our evaluation has led to 59 bug reports for
widely used production JVMs, OpenJDK and OpenJ9.
Keywords: JVM, JIT Compiler, Optimization
ACM Reference Format:
Zifan Xie, Ming Wen, Shiyu Qiu, and Hai Jin. 2024. Validating JVM
Compilers via Maximizing Optimization Interactions. In 29th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674188

1

Introduction

Compiler optimization plays a pivotal role in modern programming language virtual machines, significantly enhancing application performance. For example, the Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) employs advanced optimization techniques
to translate frequently executed bytecode into machine code,
thereby boosting performance. This process is facilitated by
the Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler, an integral and indispensable component within various JVM implementations (e.g.,
HotSpot in OpenJDK) as well as in virtual machines for other
programming languages (e.g., JavaScript V8 Turbofan [47]).
The JVM’s JIT compiler has implemented a wide array of
intricate optimization techniques, including lock elimination,
loop unrolling, and function inlining. Recognized as one of
the most significant yet complex components in JVM, the
JIT compiler has witnessed an increase in the occurrence
of bugs, becoming more pervasive over recent years [23].
Unfortunately, ensuring the accuracy of JIT compilers is challenging. Despite the commendable performance achieved by
many existing testing tools [6, 7, 23, 28, 53], a recent study
revealed that the majority of disclosed bugs are shallow [28],
which are often triggered at the initial parsing and verification stages. Besides, we observe that various optimization

