Selectively Uniform Concurrency Testing
Huan Zhao

Dylan Wolff

zhaohuan@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

wolffd@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Umang Mathur

Abhik Roychoudhury

umathur@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

abhik@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Abstract
Buggy behaviors in concurrent programs are notoriously elusive, as they may manifest only in few of exponentially many
possible thread interleavings. Randomized concurrency testing techniques probabilistically sample from (instead of enumerating) the vast search space and have been shown to be
both an effective as well as a scalable class of algorithms
for automated discovery of concurrency bugs. In this work
we focus on the key desirable characteristic of black-box
randomized concurrency testing algorithms — uniformity
of exploration. Unfortunately, prior randomized algorithms
acutely fall short on uniformity and, as a result, struggle to expose bugs that only manifest in few, infrequent interleavings.
Towards this, we show that, indeed, a sampling strategy for
uniformly sampling over the interleaving space, is eminently
achievable with minimal additional information for broad
classes of programs. Moreover, when applied to a carefully selected subset of program events, this interleaving-uniformity
strategy allows for an effective exploration of program behaviors. We present an online randomized concurrency testing
algorithm named Selectively Uniform Random Walk (SURW)
that builds on these insights. SURW is the first of its class to
achieve interleaving-uniformity for a wide class of programs,
or an arbitrary subset of events thereof. This property translates to effective behavioral exploration should a subset with
desirable characteristics be selected. Extensive evaluation on
leading concurrency benchmarks suggests SURW is able to
expose more bugs and significantly faster than comparable
randomized algorithms. In addition, we show that SURW is
able to explore both the space of interleavings and behaviors
more uniformly on real-world programs.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software verification and validation; • Security and privacy
→ Formal methods and theory of security.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 International License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707214

Keywords: Concurrency Bugs Detection, Concurrency Testing, Random Testing, Probabilistic Sampling
ACM Reference Format:
Huan Zhao, Dylan Wolff, Umang Mathur, and Abhik Roychoudhury.
2025. Selectively Uniform Concurrency Testing . In Proceedings of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707214

1

Introduction

Concurrency is essential to ensure responsiveness and performance of modern software programs. However, these
benefits come at a cost of increased complexity and resulting concurrency-related bugs. These bugs are notoriously
difficult to expose and reproduce, yet they can have dire consequences for the safety, security and availability of critical
software systems [14, 29, 59]. While many developers turn
to stress testing to find concurrency bugs, such methods
are often insufficient because their effectiveness is highly
dependent on the non-deterministic OS scheduler.
In response, Controlled Concurrency Testing (CCT) has
emerged as a popular testing paradigm that addresses these
challenges and is seeing increasing adoption in industry
settings [12, 56]. CCT tools aim to uncover buggy program
behaviors that may only exhibit under specific orderings
of thread executions, called interleavings. To explore these
interleavings, CCT tools typically serialize the execution by
allowing only one thread to execute one atomic event at a
time, allowing for greater control during testing. The number
of possible interleavings is typically exponentially larger
than the number of instructions in the underlying program;
thus, a key challenge in designing effective CCT algorithms,
lies in developing an effective exploration algorithm for the
vast interleaving space.
Systematic testing approaches such as model checkers [18,
27, 43, 63] attempt to exhaustively traverse the space, and
often employ techniques such as reduction [22, 57], bounding
exploration to a small subset of behaviors, such as those
with a small number of preemptive context switches [43] or
short delays [18]. Unfortunately, in practice the enumerative

