Exo 2: Growing a Scheduling Language
Yuka Ikarashi

Kevin Qian

Samir Droubi

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA

Alex Reinking

Gilbert Louis Bernstein

Jonathan Ragan-Kelley

Adobe
Cambridge, USA

University of Washington
Seattle, USA

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA

Abstract

1

User-schedulable languages (USLs) help programmers productively optimize programs by providing safe means of
transforming them. Current USLs are designed to give programmers exactly the control they want, while automating
all other concerns. However, there is no universal answer
for what performance-conscious programmers want to control, how they want to control it, and what they want to
automate, even in relatively narrow domains. We claim that
USLs should, instead, be designed to grow. We present Exo
2, a scheduling language that enables users to define new
scheduling operations externally to the compiler. By composing a set of trusted, fine-grained primitives, users can
safely write their own scheduling library to build up desired
automation. We identify actions (ways of modifying code),
inspection (ways of interrogating code), and references (ways
of pointing to code) as essential for any user-extensible USL.
We fuse these ideas into a new mechanism called Cursors
that enables the creation of scheduling libraries in user code.
We demonstrate libraries that amortize scheduling effort
across more than 80 high-performance kernels, reducing total scheduling code by an order of magnitude and delivering
performance competitive with state-of-the-art implementations on three different platforms.

The process of optimizing a program consists of repeatedly
modifying it into new programs which compute the same
result more efficiently. User-schedulable languages (USLs)
such as Halide, TVM, TACO, and Taichi offer a promising
solution to increase programmer productivity when doing
such optimization [10, 28, 39, 54, 56]. USLs reify this optimization process into an explicit scheduling meta-program
that transforms an underlying object program into a betterperforming one. By providing formal or informal guarantees
that scheduling transformations preserve the equivalence of
the object program, USLs enable performance engineers to
focus on optimization strategies rather than painstakingly
ensuring correctness [57].
Some non-user schedulable languages, such as C/C++ and
Python, are designed to “grow” to large projects through
the development and composition of libraries built on top
of them [63]. These libraries add richer interfaces and functionality to the language without needing modifications to
the compiler. Current USLs are designed with a fixed set of
scheduling operations that target a particular application
domain (e.g., image processing) and/or class of optimization
(e.g., loop transformations). Similar to how scripting languages like bash, sed, and awk excel at writing small scripts,
USLs excel at optimizing small, individual kernels when the
task aligns with the language’s capabilities. However, similar to specialized scripting languages, existing USLs are not
designed to grow by implementing libraries.
The goal of these fixed sets of scheduling operations is to
provide explicit control over key optimization choices while
abstracting away tedious details. Well-designed USLs must
therefore carefully choose a delineation between automated
optimizations and user-scheduled choices exposed as scheduling operations. For instance, the Halide language automates
bounds inference, register allocation, and instruction selection (to name a few), but gives users explicit control over
loop tiling, fusion, and work vs. locality tradeoffs. When
the design works, it shields performance engineers from
unnecessary concerns, improving productivity.
In practice, however, it is difficult to design this automationcontrol boundary perfectly. When the design breaks down,
performance engineers have no way to cross the boundary

CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Domain specific languages.
Keywords: user-schedulable languages, meta-programming,
performance engineering, high-performance computing
ACM Reference Format:
Yuka Ikarashi, Kevin Qian, Samir Droubi, Alex Reinking, Gilbert
Louis Bernstein, and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. 2025. Exo 2: Growing a
Scheduling Language. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 35 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707218
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707218

Introduction

