arXiv:2411.11217v1 [cs.DC] 18 Nov 2024

MoE-Lightning: High-Throughput MoE Inference on
Memory-constrained GPUs
Shiyi Cao

Shu Liu

Tyler Griggs

shicao@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

lshu@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

tgriggs@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

Peter Schafhalter

Xiaoxuan Liu

Ying Sheng

pschafhalter@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

xiaoxuan_liu@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

ying1123@stanford.edu
Stanford
Palo Alto, CA, USA

Joseph E. Gonzalez

Matei Zaharia

Ion Stoica

jegonzal@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

matei@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

istoica@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

Abstract

each input, MoE models activate only a subset of experts,
thereby improving computational efficiency.
While the MoE models achieve strong performance in
many tasks [10, 22], unfortunately, their deployment is challenging due to the significantly increased memory demand
for the same number of active parameters. For example, the
Mixtral 8x22B model [32] requires over 256 GB of memory
for the parameters of the expert feed-forward network (FFN),
which is 4 − 5× higher than the memory requirements of
dense models that require similar FLOPs for inference.
In this paper, we study how to achieve high-throughput
MoE inference with limited GPU memory. We are focusing on off-line, batch-processing workloads such as model
evaluation [29], synthetic data generation [14], data wrangling [33], form processing [7], and LLM for relational analytics [31] where higher inference throughput translates
into lower total completion time.
The common approach for memory-constrained batch
inference is to offload model weights [4, 19] and key-value
tensors of earlier tokens (KV cache) [42] — which are needed
for generating the next token – to CPU memory or disk. Then,
they are loaded layer-by-layer to the GPU for computation.
Unfortunately, existing solutions fall short of effectively
overlapping computations with data transfers between CPU
and GPU. For instance, the GPU may remain idle as it awaits
a small yet crucial piece of data such as intermediate results
for the upcoming batch. At the same time, transferring the
weights for subsequent layers may take a long time and
potentially block both the GPU and CPU from processing
further tasks, leading to under-utilization of all the resources.
As a result, efficient MoE inference for throughput-oriented
workloads using limited GPU memory remains challenging.
We find that increasing I/O utilization and other resource utilization is critical in achieving high throughput. For example,

Efficient deployment of large language models, particularly
Mixture of Experts (MoE) models, on resource-constrained
platforms presents significant challenges in terms of computational efficiency and memory utilization. The MoE architecture, renowned for its ability to increase model capacity
without a proportional increase in inference cost, greatly
reduces the token generation latency compared with dense
models. However, the large model size makes MoE models inaccessible to individuals without high-end GPUs. In
this paper, we propose a high-throughput MoE batch inference system, MoE-Lightning, that significantly outperforms
past work. MoE-Lightning introduces a novel CPU-GPU-I/O
pipelining schedule, CGOPipe, with paged weights to achieve
high resource utilization, and a performance model, HRM,
based on a Hierarchical Roofline Model we introduce to help
find policies with higher throughput than existing systems.
MoE-Lightning can achieve up to 10.3× higher throughput
than state-of-the-art offloading-enabled LLM inference systems for Mixtral 8x7B on a single T4 GPU (16GB). When
the theoretical system throughput is bounded by the GPU
memory, MoE-Lightning can reach the throughput upper
bound with 2–3× less CPU memory, significantly increasing
resource utilization. MoE-Lightning also supports efficient
batch inference for much larger MoEs (e.g., Mixtral 8x22B
and DBRX) on multiple low-cost GPUs (e.g., 2–4 T4s).

1

Introduction

Mixture of Experts (MoE) [10, 22, 41, 46] is a paradigm shift
in the architecture of Large Language Models (LLMs) that
leverages sparsely-activated expert sub-networks to enhance
model performance without significantly increasing the number of operations required for inference. Unlike dense models [40, 47, 53], where all model parameters are activated for
1

