TaOPT: Tool-Agnostic Optimization of Parallelized
Automated Mobile UI Testing
Dezhi Ran

Zihe Song

Wenyu Wang

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS
Peking University
Beijing, China
dezhiran@pku.edu.cn

University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, USA
zihe.song@utdallas.edu

University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, USA
i@wenyu.io

Wei Yang

Tao Xie

University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, USA
wei.yang@utdallas.edu

Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS
Peking University
Beijing, China
taoxie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The emergence of modern testing clouds, equipped with a
vast array of real testing devices and high-fidelity emulators,
has significantly increased the need for parallel automated
mobile testing to optimally utilize the resources of testing
clouds. Parallel testing aligns perfectly with the characteristic of rapid iteration cycles for mobile app development,
where testing time is limited. While numerous tools have
been proposed for optimizing the testing effectiveness on a
single testing device, it remains an open problem to optimize
the parallelization of automated mobile UI testing in terms of
resource and time utilization. To optimize the parallelization
of automated mobile UI testing, in this paper, we propose
TaOPT, a fully automated, tool-agnostic approach, which
improves the parallelization effectiveness of any given testing tool without modifying the tool’s internal workflow. In
particular, TaOPT conducts online analysis to infer loosely
coupled UI subspaces in the App Under Test (AUT). TaOPT
then manages access to these subspaces across various testing devices, guiding automated UI testing toward distinct
subspaces on different devices without knowing the testing tool’s internal workflow. We apply TaOPT on 18 highly
popular mobile apps with three state-of-the-art automated
UI testing tools for Android. Evaluation results show that
TaOPT helps the tools reach comparable code coverage using 60% less testing duration and 62% less machine time than
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/2025/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716282

the baseline on average. In addition, TaOPT consistently enhances automated UI testing tools to detect 1.2 to 2.1 times
more unique crashes given the same testing resources.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software testing and debugging; • Theory of computation
→ Dynamic graph algorithms.
Keywords: UI Testing, Mobile Testing, Parallel Testing, Android, Parallelization, Graph Partition, Online Algorithm
ACM Reference Format:
Dezhi Ran, Zihe Song, Wenyu Wang, Wei Yang, and Tao Xie. 2025.
TaOPT: Tool-Agnostic Optimization of Parallelized Automated
Mobile UI Testing . In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3,
2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3716282

1

Introduction

Given the importance of quality assurance for mobile apps,
automated User Interface (UI) testing [1, 4, 14, 15, 21, 27, 36,
40–42, 47, 53, 60, 63, 64, 66, 69, 70, 78] has been developed
to automatically generate and execute test inputs for Apps
Under Test (AUTs). UI testing involves exploring an app’s
UI space, which encompasses all possible UI states, and the
transitions between them. The UI transitions, triggered by interactions such as clicks or swipes, form a cohesive structure
known as the UI transition graph, representing how users
navigate through the app. While traditional efforts focus on
enhancing the coverage of AUTs’ UI spaces [69] and identifying unique crashes on a single device, the advent of testing
clouds [31–33, 37, 48, 55], equipped with a wide range of real
devices and emulators, underscores the necessity of parallel
automated mobile testing (in short as parallelized testing) to
leverage these resources. Yet, the task of effectively parallelizing testing of an AUT across multiple devices on testing clouds
remains a significant challenge. In this context, a parallelization strategy akin to those used in distributed and parallel

