arXiv:2502.06888v1 [cs.LG] 9 Feb 2025

Klotski: Efficient Mixture-of-Expert Inference via
Expert-Aware Multi-Batch Pipeline
Zhiyuan Fang

Yuegui Huang

Zicong Hong

Sun Yat-sen University
Zhuhai, China
fangzhy27@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
huangyg35@mail3.sysu.edu.cn

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, China
ziconghong@gmail.com

Yufeng Lyu

Wuhui Chen

Yue Yu∗

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
Shenzhen, China
lvyufeng1@huawei.com

Sun Yat-sen University
Zhuhai, China
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Shenzhen, China
chenwuh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Peng Cheng Laboratory
Shenzhen, China
yuy@pcl.ac.cn

Fan Yu

Zibin Zheng

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
Shenzhen, China
fan.yu@huawei.com

Sun Yat-sen University
Zhuhai, China
zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

1

Introduction

Mixture of Experts (MoE), with its distinctive sparse structure, enables the scaling of language models up to trillions of
parameters without significantly increasing computational
costs. However, the substantial parameter size presents a
challenge for inference, as the expansion in GPU memory
cannot keep pace with the growth in parameters. Although
offloading techniques utilise memory from the CPU and disk
and parallelise the I/O and computation for efficiency, the
computation for each expert in MoE models is often less than
the I/O, resulting in numerous bubbles in the pipeline.
Therefore, we propose Klotski, an efficient MoE inference
engine that significantly reduces pipeline bubbles through a
novel expert-aware multi-batch pipeline paradigm. The proposed paradigm uses batch processing to extend the computation time of the current layer to overlap with the loading
time of the next layer. Although this idea has been effectively applied to dense models, more batches may activate
more experts in the MoE, leading to longer loading times
and more bubbles. Thus, unlike traditional approaches, we
balance computation and I/O time and minimise bubbles
by orchestrating their inference orders based on their heterogeneous computation and I/O requirements and activation patterns under different batch numbers. Moreover, to
adapt to different hardware environments and models, we
design a constraint-sensitive I/O-compute planner and a
correlation-aware expert prefetcher for a schedule that minimises pipeline bubbles. Experimental results demonstrate
that Klotski achieves a superior throughput-latency tradeoff compared to state-of-the-art techniques, with throughput
improvements of up to 85.12×.

Owing to the rapid advancement of deep learning, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable efficacy
across various domains [4, 7, 46]. To facilitate model scalability without escalating the costs associated with training and
inference, recent research has introduced sparsely activated
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models [10, 33]. MoE models typically replace the Feed-Forward Network (FFN) layers with
MoE layers. For each input, only a subset of the parameters
(i.e., experts) are sparsely activated for computation, rather
than all parameters, significantly reducing computational
cost. Current research has demonstrated the superiority of
the MoE architecture through extensive experiments [15, 30].
However, due to the skew between model parameter sizes
and advances in hardware, MoE-based models, with their
massive parameter counts, face more severe memory bottlenecks during inference than other LLMs. For example,
DeepSeek-V2 [6], with 236 billion parameters, requires at
least seven state-of-the-art (SOTA) GPUs (H100, with 80GB
of memory each) for inference. Furthermore, the high cost
of memory often makes it difficult to use such large models
in more common environments such as personal computers and small servers, limiting the wider adoption of large
models [8, 25, 40]. This raises the question of how to deploy
MoE models in resource-constrained environments where
there is a significant gap between available GPU memory
and model parameter sizes.
Offloading is one of the current mainstream solutions for
addressing memory optimization during the inference of
LLMs [9, 20, 32, 34]. It significantly reduces GPU memory
requirements for LLM inference by offloading tensors not

