Selectively Uniform Concurrency Testing
Huan Zhao

Dylan Wolff

zhaohuan@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

wolffd@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Umang Mathur

Abhik Roychoudhury

umathur@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

abhik@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Abstract
Buggy behaviors in concurrent programs are notoriously elusive, as they may manifest only in few of exponentially many
possible thread interleavings. Randomized concurrency testing techniques probabilistically sample from (instead of enumerating) the vast search space and have been shown to be
both an effective as well as a scalable class of algorithms
for automated discovery of concurrency bugs. In this work
we focus on the key desirable characteristic of black-box
randomized concurrency testing algorithms — uniformity
of exploration. Unfortunately, prior randomized algorithms
acutely fall short on uniformity and, as a result, struggle to expose bugs that only manifest in few, infrequent interleavings.
Towards this, we show that, indeed, a sampling strategy for
uniformly sampling over the interleaving space, is eminently
achievable with minimal additional information for broad
classes of programs. Moreover, when applied to a carefully selected subset of program events, this interleaving-uniformity
strategy allows for an effective exploration of program behaviors. We present an online randomized concurrency testing
algorithm named Selectively Uniform Random Walk (SURW)
that builds on these insights. SURW is the first of its class to
achieve interleaving-uniformity for a wide class of programs,
or an arbitrary subset of events thereof. This property translates to effective behavioral exploration should a subset with
desirable characteristics be selected. Extensive evaluation on
leading concurrency benchmarks suggests SURW is able to
expose more bugs and significantly faster than comparable
randomized algorithms. In addition, we show that SURW is
able to explore both the space of interleavings and behaviors
more uniformly on real-world programs.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software verification and validation; • Security and privacy
→ Formal methods and theory of security.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 International License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707214

Keywords: Concurrency Bugs Detection, Concurrency Testing, Random Testing, Probabilistic Sampling
ACM Reference Format:
Huan Zhao, Dylan Wolff, Umang Mathur, and Abhik Roychoudhury.
2025. Selectively Uniform Concurrency Testing . In Proceedings of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707214

1

Introduction

Concurrency is essential to ensure responsiveness and performance of modern software programs. However, these
benefits come at a cost of increased complexity and resulting concurrency-related bugs. These bugs are notoriously
difficult to expose and reproduce, yet they can have dire consequences for the safety, security and availability of critical
software systems [14, 29, 59]. While many developers turn
to stress testing to find concurrency bugs, such methods
are often insufficient because their effectiveness is highly
dependent on the non-deterministic OS scheduler.
In response, Controlled Concurrency Testing (CCT) has
emerged as a popular testing paradigm that addresses these
challenges and is seeing increasing adoption in industry
settings [12, 56]. CCT tools aim to uncover buggy program
behaviors that may only exhibit under specific orderings
of thread executions, called interleavings. To explore these
interleavings, CCT tools typically serialize the execution by
allowing only one thread to execute one atomic event at a
time, allowing for greater control during testing. The number
of possible interleavings is typically exponentially larger
than the number of instructions in the underlying program;
thus, a key challenge in designing effective CCT algorithms,
lies in developing an effective exploration algorithm for the
vast interleaving space.
Systematic testing approaches such as model checkers [18,
27, 43, 63] attempt to exhaustively traverse the space, and
often employ techniques such as reduction [22, 57], bounding
exploration to a small subset of behaviors, such as those
with a small number of preemptive context switches [43] or
short delays [18]. Unfortunately, in practice the enumerative

search algorithm may only explore a small proportion of
similar interleavings in the allotted time-budget, especially
for large software systems.
In contrast, randomized testing [6, 52, 63, 69, 70] approaches
sample from the space to witness more diverse interleavings.
As with their systematic counterparts, randomized testing
algorithms also employ reduction techniques [65, 70] or explore only bounded sub-spaces which are considered more
likely to harbor bugs [6, 63]. While these algorithms are
not able to prove the absence of bugs, some provide probabilistic guarantees for observing buggy behaviors [6, 70]. In
practice, these randomized algorithms tend to outperform
systematic approaches [34, 61] while remaining scalable to
large, real-world software.
In this work, we consider a key desirable objective of
randomized CCT algorithms fundamental for effective exploration of the underlying search space — uniformity. In
absence of prior knowledge about the bug or the program
characteristics, the optimal exploration strategy should sample all interleavings with equal probability, i.e., must be uniform. Yet existing approaches of choosing each thread or
each context switch point with equal probability do not yield
uniformity, even for relatively simple programs (c.f. Section
2.1). Our first key insight is that interleaving-uniformity is
eminently achievable for broad classes of programs. In fact,
it can be attained in an efficient online algorithm, with only
minimal information about the program under test, namely
an accurate estimate of the number of events on each thread.
At the same time, we also observe that uniformity over the
interleaving space does not necessarily translate to effective
exploration of program behaviors. Often, many programs
behaviors are represented by proportionally more (or fewer)
interleavings than others, resulting in the over (or under)sampling of such behaviors by an otherwise interleavinguniform algorithm. Towards this, we present our second key
insight — uniform sampling on the space of interleavings of
an appropriately selected subset of program events can in fact
serve as a good proxy for uniform exploration of program
behaviors.
In this paper, we present a new randomized CCT algorithm, Selectively Uniform Random Walk (SURW), which exploits the aforementioned insights. SURW is the first randomized CCT algorithm that achieves interleaving-uniformity for
a pre-selected subset of program events. As a result, given
the full subset of all events, SURW samples all interleavings
uniformly; given a subset of events that are likely key in determining the behavior of the program, it effectively explores
program behaviors. We compare SURW with other randomized
CCT algorithms qualitatively (c.f. Section 3.3), and also provide strong guarantees for finding concurrency bugs under
several common concurrency design patterns (c.f. Section
3.4). SURW achieves selective uniformity by making eager
scheduling decisions with weighted random walk, where the
weights are determined to be estimates of the number of

events remaining to be scheduled, in each thread. The selected subset of events relevant for achieving selectivity can
either be automatically inferred or manually provided as an
input by a domain expert, thereby allowing complete control
of the sampling granularity and focus.
We evaluate SURW extensively on leading CCT benchmarks [7, 30, 61]. Experiments show that SURW is able to
(1) expose more bugs and (2) trigger bugs with fewer schedules than comparable randomized algorithms. We note that
SURW achieves these results even with a simple heuristic for
identifying promising selected event subsets. These results
suggest that SURW has further potential to be combined with
more sophisticated subset selection procedures. In our case
study, we also find that SURW can explore the space of interleavings and behaviors better than comparable algorithms
for real-world programs, both in terms of diversity and evenness.
In summary, we claim the following contributions:
• We propose interleaving-uniformity over selected events
as a principled way to sample concurrent behaviors.
• We introduce the first randomized testing algorithm
that guarantees interleaving uniformity for broad classes
of programs, or for arbitrary parts thereof.
• We evaluated our approach extensively on leading
benchmarks and real-world programs to demonstrate
its efficacy in bug finding and space exploration.

2

Motivation

In this section, we discuss selective uniformity as a key desirable property for randomized CCT algorithms (Section 2.1
and Section 2.2), discuss prior algorithms and how they fare
on this property, and also present insights behind how our
SURW algorithm is structured.
2.1

Uniformity

The goal of randomized concurrency testing algorithms is to
find bugs that arise from multi-threaded program behaviors.
Without knowing a priori which of the many possible program behaviors trigger a bug, these algorithms should aim
to sample such behaviors uniformly. Unfortunately, unique
behaviors are highly program-dependent, and are impossible
to predict or even count for complex programs [46, 64]. However, each unique program behavior must correspond to at
least one interleaving for sequentially consistent programs.
Additionally, unlike program behaviors, program interleavings can be sampled uniformly for broad classes of complex
programs. A principled randomized CCT algorithm should
strive to at least achieve interleaving uniformity.
Consider the illustrative program in Figure 1. It consists
of two threads, each with 5 atomic events on a shared variable 𝑥. At each step, either 0 or 1 is appended to the binary
representation of 𝑥, depending on which thread it is on. This
program has 10
5 = 252 possible interleavings and the same
2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

void thread_A () {
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
}

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

void thread_B () {
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
}

Figure 1. Two threads performing atomic bit-shifts on a
shared variable 𝑥. URW samples each result of 𝑥 uniformly.

Figure 2. Histogram of the value of 𝑥 in Figure 1 sampled
by URW (left), Random Walk (middle) and PCT-10 (right).

number of behaviors, which in this case is determined by the
value of the shared variable 𝑥 at the end of an execution. Despite the simplicity of this relatively trivial example, existing
randomized testing algorithms [6, 70] perform poorly on the
uniformity metric, and are heavily biased in practice when
sampling program interleavings. We discuss some of these
next. At a high level, these algorithms work in an online
manner, executing the program one event at a time. At each
point during the execution, such algorithms typically pick
one of the enabled (i.e., unblocked) threads, either deterministically (by means of, say, assigning priorities) or randomly
by picking an enabled thread according to some probability
distribution.

only 𝑑 − 1 intentional context switches. These switch points
are sampled from all possible positions in the interleaving
with equal probability. For PCT to witness all possible results of 𝑥 in Figure 1, the depth parameter must be set so
that 𝑑 ≥ 10 (giving us PCT-10). PCT-10 is guaranteed to
witness any result with a probability of 2−1 · 10−9 , which is
admittedly a poor bound for a program with only 252 possible interleavings. Indeed, we see that the distribution of
interleavings imposed by PCT-10 is highly skewed (see Figure 2 (right)). We observed that, even after more than 25000
repeated trials in our experiment, PCT-10 fails to generate
38 unique interleavings.
URW. Let us now discuss the Uniform Random Walk (URW),
the first algorithm we propose in this work. URW samples
from the interleaving space of the entire program in Figure 1
provably uniformly, and our evaluation confirms this (see
Figure 2 (left)). Crucially, we observe that sampling each
thread (Random Walk) or each context switch point (PCT)
uniformly does not yield uniformity in the interleaving space.
Instead, the key ingredient for uniformity is an accurate
estimate of the number of events in each thread that are
remaining to be scheduled. URW is then essentially a weighted
random walk that chooses each thread 𝑇𝑡 with probability
proportional to the number of remaining events in 𝑇𝑡 .

Random walk. This algorithm is the simplest randomized
CCT algorithm and works by scheduling, at each point, each
of the enabled threads to execute next, with equal probability.
This simplistic uniformity on possible scheduling decisions
at each point, however, does not translate to uniformity over
the space of interleavings! For the program in Figure 1, the
distribution on the resulting interleavings generated by Random Walk is highly skewed — the two most likely interleavings1 are sampled with probability 2−5 , whereas a majority
of interleavings are sampled with probability only 2−9 . We
note that this disparity gets exacerbated in larger programs
with uneven thread lengths. Figure 2 (middle) shows the
empirical distribution of interleavings sampled by Random
Walk in this example, with a few interleavings being sampled
with much higher frequency than others.

2.2

Selectivity

While interleaving uniformity is desirable for randomized
CCT algorithms, admittedly, it does not always translate to
behavioral uniformity. In Figure 1, program behaviors and interleavings are synonymous; but in general, a single program
behavior may often result from multiple distinct interleavings. Further, the number of interleavings that are behaviorally equivalent to each other could be highly variable
– some behaviors could correspond to disproportionately
more interleavings than others. An algorithm like URW that
focuses on interleaving uniformity is likely to over-sample
these behaviors. Our second key insight is to uniformly sample interleavings selectively, only for a subset of events whose
interleavings are more evenly distributed across behavioral
partitions. We call this subset of events as interesting events,
since distributions on interleavings of these events have a
closer correspondence with distribution on behaviors.

POS. Partial Order Sampling (POS) [70] employs reduction
to reduce the bias induced due to equivalent interleavings
on top of Random Walk. Operationally, it assigns a single
random priority per thread to increase the chance of concurrent accesses being simultaneously enabled (i.e., racing),
and, when that happens, POS chooses each racing event
with equal probability. In our running example (Figure 1)
though, all events race with each other and thus POS chooses
a random thread at each step, degrading it to Random Walk.
PCT. The Probabilistic Concurrency Testing (PCT) family of algorithms [6, 44–46] cater to bugs of shallow depth,
parametrized by a parameter 𝑑, and operationally impose
1 The two most likely interleavings are 𝑥 = 31 or 31 × 25 . The least likely


ones end with 0b10 or 0b01. There are 2 · 84 = 140 such results.
3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

void thread_A () {
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
x = x < <1;
y = y < <1;
// repeat 1000 x
y = y < <1;
}

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Γ-Completeness For any feasible interleaving of the
entire program (that include all events Γ), the algorithm samples it with non-zero probability;
Δ-Uniformity For the chosen subset Δ ⊆ Γ of events,
the algorithm samples their interleavings uniformly.

void thread_B () {
y = y < <1+1;
// repeat 1000 x
y = y < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1;
x = x < <1+1+ y %8;
}

In this paper, we devise a algorithm named Selectively
Uniform Random Walk (SURW) that satisfies the aforementioned properties. Given a pre-defined subset of interesting
events Δ, it prioritizes sampling of their interleavings uniformly (with URW), and schedules other events carefully to
respect the ordering constraints from interesting events. We
delegate detailed discussions on how to isolate the set of
interesting events Δ to Section 3.6. For Figure 3, if Δ contains
all accesses to 𝑥, SURW can sample each interleaving of 𝑥 uniformly, without disabling any result of 𝑦 or any interaction
between 𝑥 and 𝑦. This achieves the desirable distribution
described earlier.

Figure 3. Two threads performing atomic bit-shifts on dependent shared variables 𝑥 and 𝑦. Behaviors 𝑥 = 31 + 𝑦%8
happen in dominantly many interleavings.
Consider the more involved illustrative program in Figure 3; here again we use the final value of the shared variable
𝑥 as proxy for the program behavior. Here, 𝑥 is dependent on
𝑦 (line 9 of thread_B, or B9 for short), and 𝑦 is accessed 1000
times on each thread (in blue). The behavioral partitioning of
the interleaving space is thus highly skewed. Concretely, to
witness any result 𝑥 ≠ (31 + 𝑦%8), event A6 has to be scheduled after event B5. This happens with vanishingly small
probabilities even with interleaving uniformity, since A6 has
to be delayed after 1000 accesses of 𝑦 on thread B (B2-B4).
Readers may have observed that accesses to 𝑥 (in black)
are a candidate subset of interesting events. Indeed, their
interleavings are more evenly partitioned behaviorally and
heavily influence the program’s behavior. If we have this
information in advance, we might try to explore interleavings
of only accesses to 𝑥, rather than the entire program. This
1
allows us to sample 251 values of 𝑥 with probability 252
, and
1 2
8 other values with a combined probability of 252 . Despite
a slight bias, the resulting distribution is much closer to
behavioral uniformity.
We remark that such selectivity must be exercised with
caution. Consider, for example, the natural (but naive) extension of URW that invokes the weighted random walk only
when enabled events are interesting, and otherwise continues executing the previously executed thread. This strategy
indeed recovers interleaving uniformity for 𝑥, but it unfortunately comes with considerable loss of exploratory power —
now only two of ≈ 21000 possible interleavings of 𝑦 (in blue)
can be witnessed, and thus 𝑦%8 only takes its value from
either 0 or 7. This makes the algorithm incomplete, because
some program behaviors could never be sampled. Moreover,
this precludes interactions between accesses on 𝑥 and 𝑦,
which could also be problematic for a general program.
Therefore, we aim to design a selectively uniform algorithm
featuring the following two key properties; here we use Γ to
denote the set of all events of the program, and Δ to be the
set of events chosen to be interesting (also note Δ ⊆ Γ):

3

Approach

In this section, we present the design and analysis of URW and
SURW in detail, and discuss their guarantees for interleavings
(Section 3.3) and bug finding (Section 3.4) in simple settings,
and likely behaviors in more complex programs (Section 3.5).
We provide guidance on how to identify the set of interesting
events in Section 3.6.
3.1 URW
Randomized CCT algorithms typically sample interleavings
in a streaming fashion: at each step, the algorithm determines
an enabled thread to execute its next event. A thread is said to
be enabled if its next event is executable. We assume that the
next event of any enabled thread is visible to the algorithm
and is solely determined by the execution history.
We first present our basic algorithm URW (Algorithm 1).
URW takes, as input, integers 𝑛 1, 𝑛 2 . . . , 𝑛𝑘 , corresponding to
threads 𝑇1, . . . ,𝑇𝑘 of the program-under-test (line 1). URW is
guaranteed to uniformly sample those interleavings of the
Í
program whose length is 𝑛 = 𝑘𝑖=1 𝑛𝑖 and contain, for each
𝑖, 𝑛𝑖 events from thread 𝑇𝑖 , when there is no blocking (e.g.,
wait-signal) synchronization, i.e., a thread is always enabled
until it exits. We postpone the discussion on programs with
synchronizations to Section 3.5.
At its core, URW is essentially weighted random walk, where
the weights are determined by the number of remaining
events in each thread. At each step, URW selects a thread
𝑇𝑡 until no more thread is enabled (line 2). Each enabled
thread 𝑇𝑖 is selected with a weight that is proportional to the
number of events 𝑛𝑖 remaining on that thread (line 3). The
weight of thread 𝑇𝑡 is initialized using the input provided,
and decreased by one whenever an event of thread 𝑇𝑡 is
selected to be executed next (line 4).
URW’s uniformity is a consequence of the choice of the
weights. Intuitively, the weight of thread 𝑇𝑖 represents the

2 Here, the less likely behaviors are 𝑥 = (31+𝑦%8), from a single interleaving

of 𝑥 (A6 before B5) and different interleavings of 𝑦. All other interleavings
of 𝑥 give 𝑦%8 = 0 and thus corresponds to a single program behavior.
4

Algorithm 1: URW

Algorithm 2: SURW

Input: 𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑘 ;
// event counts
2 while 𝐸 ← getEnabled() ≠ ∅ do
Í
3
𝑇𝑡 ← random 𝑇𝑖 with Pr(𝑇𝑖 ) = 𝑛𝑖 / 𝑗 ∈𝐸 𝑛 𝑗 ;
4
𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑛𝑡 − 1;
5
execute(nextEvent(𝑇𝑡 ));

Input: Δ;
// set of interesting events
2 Input: 𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑘 ; // interesting event counts
3 𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 ← random 𝑇𝑖 weighted by 𝑛𝑖 ;
4 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 ← ∅;
5 while 𝐸 ← getEnabled() ≠ ∅ do
6
𝑇𝑡 ← pickFrom(𝐸 - 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑);
7
if nextEvent(𝑇𝑡 ) ∈ Δ then
8
if 𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 == 𝑇𝑡 then
9
𝑛𝑡 ← 𝑛𝑡 − 1;
10
𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 ← random 𝑇𝑖 weighted by 𝑛𝑖 ;
11
𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 ← ∅;
12
else
13
𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑.add(𝑇𝑡 ); continue;
14
execute(nextEvent(𝑇𝑡 ));

1

1

number of interleavings starting with NextEvent(𝑇𝑖 ). Suppose that, at some point of the execution of the algorithm,
exactly 𝑘 ′ threads 𝑇 𝑗1 ,𝑇 𝑗2 , . . . ,𝑇 𝑗𝑘 ′ are enabled. Let us use 𝑒 𝑗𝑖
and 𝑛 𝑗𝑖 to denote the next event and the number of remaining
events in thread 𝑇 𝑗𝑖 . In this case, the number 𝑠 𝑗𝑖 of possible
extensions of the execution generated thus far that also start
with 𝑒 𝑗𝑖 (for some 𝑖) can be calculated to be precisely3 :


Í𝑘 ′
𝑖=1 𝑛 𝑗𝑖 − 1
𝑠 𝑗𝑖 =
𝑛 𝑗1 , . . . , 𝑛 𝑗𝑖 − 1, . . . , 𝑛 𝑗𝑘 ′
𝑠

Now observe that for any 𝛼 ≠ 𝛽, the fraction 𝑠 𝑗𝑗𝛼 is precisely
𝛽

𝑛 𝑗𝛼
𝑛 𝑗𝛽 , as desired. Therefore, our choice of weights perfectly

other hand, threads with non-interesting events are allowed
to execute. This is enough to ensure that the resulting distribution on the interleavings of the interesting events (from
Δ) is fully determined by URW, thus satisfying Δ-Uniformity.
In the meantime, the relative ordering among uninteresting events (from Γ − Δ), as well as their order relative
to the next interesting event, is determined by the function pickFrom() (line 6). The function pickFrom() yields a
thread from the provided set, and is parameterized by another
CCT algorithm. We note that the details of pickFrom() do
not affect the distribution over the interleavings over Δ. This
is because any unintended interesting events will always
be blocked. Further, when pickFrom() is selected so that it
samples each interleaving over Γ with non-zero probability
(when Δ = ∅), then SURW is guaranteed to be Γ-Complete. In
this work, we satisfy this requirement using a simple implementation of pickFrom() that assigns a random priority to
each event independently.

sketches the count of feasible interleavings, and thus inductively leads to uniformity.
3.2 SURW
In this section, we present SURW (Algorithm 2) which extends
URW. We denote the set of all events as Γ. SURW takes as input
a pre-defined subset of interesting events Δ ⊆ Γ (line 1), and
per-thread count 𝑛𝑖 ’s of interesting events (line 2).
As preluded in Section 2.2, selective uniformity is challenging in a streaming setup. In particular, the algorithm must
make scheduling decisions about a mix of interesting events
(in Δ) and other events (in Γ − Δ) that are simultaneously
enabled. Deterministic scheduling (e.g., always picking an
event in Δ first) could potentially disallow interleavings over
Γ that are otherwise feasible, violating the requirement ΓCompleteness. On the other hand, naive randomized scheduling (e.g., choosing 𝑒 1 first with some probability) could
deter uniformity over Δ, thus violating Δ-Uniformity. Our
algorithm circumvents this — it makes eager scheduling decisions for events in Δ, potentially even before they are actually
enabled.
More specifically, SURW determines (in advance) a thread
𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 that is intended to execute the next interesting event
from Δ. Out of the many threads with non-zero (remaining) interesting events, we select this intended thread via
weighted random walk as before (line 3). Our algorithm
then ensures that henceforth, the first interesting event to
be scheduled necessarily comes from thread 𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 . This is
achieved by actively blocking any other thread which is about
to execute an interesting event from Δ (line 12-13). On the
3 Multi-choose function

3.3 Comparison with Prior CCT Algorithms
In this section, we compare SURW’s guarantee with prior popular randomized CCT algorithms, and present a qualitative
comparison with them.
SURW v/s POS. POS [70] achieves its efficacy through on-thefly dynamic partial order reduction. If one marks conflicting
accesses as interesting (Δ), SURW could achieve a similar effect. Further, when the equivalence relation induced by the
underlying partial order is too fine-grained (as in, Figure 1),
then SURW is likely to outperform POS. This happens because,
in this case, the effect of the reduction is not prominent and
POS essentially degrades to its baseline, namely, Random
Walk, and, as discussed earlier, SURW improves over naive


Í𝑘
𝑛
𝑛!
𝑛 1 ,...,𝑛𝑘 = Î𝑘 𝑛𝑖 ! (where 𝑛 = 𝑖=1 𝑛𝑖 ) represents
𝑖=1

the number of ways to partition 𝑛 elements into 𝑘 sets with different sizes.
5

Random Walk by boosting the probability of sampling otherwise infrequent interleavings.



𝑛/𝑐
≥ 1− 1−
𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑚

SURW v/s PCT. PCT-𝑑 [6, 45], is intuitively catered to finding
bugs determined by ordered 𝑑-tuples of potentially buggy
events. This family of bugs admits efficient random testing
approaches [8, 34], and is pivotal to the effectiveness of PCT.
Indeed, when the depth 𝑑 is small and is known accurately a
priori, then PCT-𝑑 is likely to be more effective. On the other
hand, when the bug depth 𝑑 is known to be large, or is unknown entirely, uniformity of behaviors or interleavings is a
good desirable property of the testing strategy, making SURW
a good choice, given that SURW is more versatile and requires
little knowledge about bug characteristics. In particular, we
observed that PCT is ineffective when ordering constraints,
a la PCT [8, 34], alone cannot characterize the class of buggy
interleavings (see Figure 4 and Section 4.2). Furthermore,
the effectiveness of PCT is poor when the bug in question
manifests only when multiple context switches happen in
close temporal proximity (see CVE-2016-1972 [13, 63]). SURW
naturally avoids these pitfalls by sampling uniformly from
the interleaving space and allowing for context switches at
each point during the execution.
3.4

 −1 ! 𝑐

where {𝑇1, . . . ,𝑇𝑚 } forms a cluster.
Duplicates. Consider a program with 𝑘 threads but only
two distinct types, namely type A and B. Bug exhibition
depends on the interleaving of any pair of type-A and type-B
threads. This could resemble programs adopting a producerconsumer or reader-writer model. Suppose there are 𝑘𝑎 typeA threads and 𝑘𝑏 type-B threads, each consisting of 𝑛𝑎 and
𝑛𝑏 interesting events, respectively. With SURW, the schedule
of any such pair is sampled uniformly and independently.
Therefore, the bug is triggered with probability

 −1 ! 𝑘𝑎 ·𝑘𝑏
𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑏
≥ 1− 1−
𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑏
3.5

Blocking Synchronizations

In previous sections, we give probabilistic guarantees of SURW
in the absence of blocking synchronizations such as waitsignal pairs. Each such pair imposes a partial order constraint
that signal happens before wait, and program interleavings could be viewed as linearizations of the partial order
sets. Uniform sampling or exact counting of all linearizations
is known to be intractable [17, 64]. While polynomial-time
algorithms exist for special cases [15, 41] or approximations
[60, 64], they are not applicable in a lightweight streaming
algorithm. However, under common synchronization scenarios, such as those induced by thread creation or critical
sections, we could adopt simple strategies to achieve more
even exploration.

Bug Finding Probability

We have presented the guarantee of SURW of hitting a particular interleaving. In practice, bugs often manifest in many
possible interleavings. Without prior knowledge of bug characteristics, however, it is hard to extrapolate this guarantee to
bug finding. If the concurrent program follows certain threading configurations, as often adopted in real-world systems,
SURW is able to give strong probabilistic guarantees of hitting
a particular bug. In contrast, other algorithms such as PCT
could not take advantage of it as much. The strengthened
guarantees do not require additional knowledge about the
program under test, but instead rely on the following property: Δ-Uniformity implies Δ T -Uniformity, where Δ T ⊆ Δ
denotes the set of interesting events that appear on a subset of threads T ∈ P. Below we introduce three common
threading scenarios that admit strong guarantees.

Thread creation. A child thread is not enabled until the
thread creation event on its parent thread is executed. However, the sampling weight of the parent thread does not take
this dependency into account, thus under-sampling interleavings where the events on children threads are scheduled
early. To mitigate this effect, we schedule each parent thread
Í
𝑇𝑝 with a combined weight 𝑛𝑝 + 𝑖 ∈𝐶𝑝 𝑛𝑖 rather than 𝑛𝑝 ,
where 𝐶𝑝 comprises of all unspawned descendant threads of
𝑇𝑝 . Moreover, we need to re-select the next intended thread
with updated weights after it creates a new thread. In effect,
this allows us to recover Δ-Uniformity.

Irrelevant threads. Consider a program where bug manifestation only depends on 𝑘 0 < 𝑘 threads. For example, monitoring or logging threads access shared resources frequently
but do not affect program behaviors. With Δ-Uniformity,
SURW also guarantees uniformity for the 𝑘 0 relevant threads.

Critical sections. Critical sections (CS) protect shared resources by preventing conflicting accesses. Let us consider
when Δ is chosen such that all events are protected by CS
for mutual exclusion. In that case, SURW may schedule lock
acquisition from another thread before the interesting event
on 𝑇𝑖𝑁 𝑒𝑥𝑡 , thus blocking the intended next thread as it waits
for a held lock. Moreover, if CS contains multiple events from
Δ, the event counts over-approximate the number of feasible
interleavings. A naive solution that treats each CS as an interesting atomic block recovers uniformity on the interleavings

Clusters. Consider a program where threads are organized
into 𝑐 duplicated clusters, each containing 𝑚 threads. Bug
exhibition depends on the interleavings of threads within
a single cluster. For example, a web server may spawn one
independent cluster of threads for each incoming client. To
witness the bug, it suffices to sample the intra-cluster schedule for any cluster, which is sampled uniformly and independently by SURW. Therefore, the success probability is
6

of CS, but violates Γ-Completeness since events inside CS
and other code segments can no longer be interleaved. One
simple mitigation is to mark only the entrances (lock acquisition) of CS as the interesting subset Δ. In this way, the
interleavings of CS could be uniformly sampled by SURW,
and events protected by the CS can still be interleaved with
other events, since they are all considered non-interesting.
3.6

SURW is still guaranteed to sample each interleaving with nonzero probability. In other words, the algorithm still functions
effectively, albeit not optimally.

4

Evaluation

In this section, we aim to understand the bug-finding ability
of SURW in practice on popular concurrency testing datasets [7,
30, 61]. Concretely, we answer the following:
RQ1 Is SURW better at exposing bugs compared to other
concurrency testing algorithms?
RQ2 How do the two key components of SURW, uniformity
and selectivity, contribute to its effectiveness?

Choosing the Set of Interesting Events

Our presentation of SURW, thus far, has intentionally treated
the set of interesting events Δ as a parameter, since a characterization of an ideal choice of Δ is orthogonal to the core
working of SURW. Nevertheless, the quality of Δ is expected
to be crucial to the performance of SURW. In general, there
are multiple ways to identify Δ — one can perform simple,
yet automated coarse-grained program analyses, possibly together with some simple guidance, or alternatively a domain
expert can help manually supply this set. We next discuss
specific heuristics to determine the event set Δ in practice.
A precise characterization of the set Δ is challenging in
general, especially without working knowledge about the internals of the program under test. Nevertheless, we present
a simple but fully automated strategy and also employ it
to obtain a baseline instantiation of SURW (see Section 4).
Here, we first randomly select a small set of shared resources,
and then mark all events that access this set of resources
as interesting. This strategy is inspired by prior empirical
studies [33] that highlight that most real-world concurrency
issues can be attributed to only a few shared variables. Concretely, for our baseline implementation of SURW in Section
4, we perform an initial profiling run, and randomly select
a few heap and global variables observed in this profiling
run, and pick Δ to be the set of all events that access these
variables. Despite this crude identification of Δ, SURW demonstrates remarkable efficacy in our evaluation. We expect a
more sophisticated automated selection strategy to further
improve the performance of SURW.
Expert advice from humans (or even Large Language Models) can help identify a more precise and effective choice for
the set Δ. We put this hypothesis to test in our case study
of LightFTP (see Section 5). Here, we select the set of interesting events to be those that correspond to all events
pertaining to file-system accesses. Our high-level intuition
behind this choice is rather straightforward — the key behavior or a file-transfer protocol (FTP) server is to modify the
file system, and thus the space of behaviors of the FTP server
are likely going to be primarily determined by the state of
the file system, which can in turn be accurately captured by
accesses to it.
We remark that the of design SURW algorithm carefully
takes into consideration the imprecision due to a poor choice
of the set Δ. This is why we emphasise SURW’s Γ-Completeness
property in Section 2.2: when the set Δ is imperfect, the behavioral distribution induced by SURW may be skewed, but

4.1

Experiment Setup

Implementation. We implement SURW and all other baselines using a custom scheduler. This scheduler serializes a
program’s execution by overriding various functions in the
pthread library as in prior work [65]. The artifact and data
used in the paper is publicly accessible at:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27627123
Interesting event subsets. Before running SURW, we conduct a single profiling run. For each execution of SURW, we
mark all accesses to randomly selected set of shared variables
as interesting events (see Section 3.6). Their counts are also
collected from the profiling run (see Section 7 for more discussions).
Instrumentation. We instrument all heap memory operations with a static binary rewriting tool E9Patch [16] to
invoke the scheduler before each memory operation. For
three target programs, we instrument only a subset of heapmemory accesses to achieve higher execution speed by omitting instructions that access read-only memory addresses
or are invoked excessively (>500 times) during execution.
These partially instrumented targets are denoted in Table 2.
Concurrency testing benchmarks. To measure the bug
finding ability of our approach, we adopt three benchmarks,
namely SCTBench [50, 61], ConVul [7, 10] and RaceBenchData [30, 48]. SCTBench and ConVul have been widely adopted
in the concurrency testing literature [63, 65, 70]. SCTBench
comprises of 42 buggy concurrent programs from real-world
concurrency bugs, including command line tools [67, 68],
concurrent data structures [11, 43] and a JavaScript engine
for FireFox [24]. We omit two programs from SCTBench that
are reported by [65] as incompatible with the instrumentation tool E9Patch [16]. The ConVul benchmark consists of
10 bugs extracted from concurrency-related CVEs from 2009
to 2017 that cause memory corruption in FireFox and Linux
kernels. We use the version curated in [63]. RaceBenchData
comprises of 15 base programs collected from existing suites
[5, 66]. 5 of the base programs consist of more than 10k lines
of production-level code, including ray tracing libraries, volume rendering and video encoding tools. These programs
7

Table 1. Result summary on SCTBench and ConVul: the
number of bugs found (max. 39) by different algorithms. All
other algorithms only find a subset of bugs exposed by SURW.

Table 2. The # of unique bugs exposed in RaceBenchData.
Each row is a base program that contains 100 bugs in total.
Targets with ∗ are selectively instrumented.

# of Bugs

SURW

PCT-3

PCT-10

POS

RW

N-U

N-S

Target

SURW

PCT-3

PCT-10

POS

RW

Total
Mean

35
34.90

33
30.70

33
30.65

30
29.05

21
20.85

32
29.75

34
31.75

blackscholes
bodytrack
canneal
cholesky∗
dedup
ferret
fluidanimate∗
pigz
raytrace
raytrace2∗
streamcluster
volrend
water_nsquared
water_spatial
x264
Total (max. 1500)

36
75
62
77
79
80
70
40
64
73
78
32
28
86
64
944

15
34
13
36
22
41
46
28
24
18
31
17
13
29
12
379

17
35
20
46
22
54
53
36
24
24
43
19
15
38
15
461

26
58
56
77
80
84
68
40
58
74
77
29
27
90
41
885

20
29
34
49
45
46
28
16
42
50
31
12
26
50
11
489

have had synthetic concurrency bugs injected into them, including deadlocks, atomicity violations and order violations.
The injected bugs introduce overheads of up to 400% into
the base programs. In all three benchmarks, bugs manifest
as assertion violations or crashes.
Baselines. We choose other well-known stateless, randomized CCT algorithms for direct comparison with SURW. These
algorithms include naive Random Walk (RW), Partial Order
Sampling (POS) [70] and Probabilistic Concurrency Testing
(PCT) [6]. Specifically, we choose PCT-3 and PCT-10. PCT-3
is reported to perform best on the SCTBench benchmark
by [61]. We also include PCT-10 as a representative case
for PCT with a large depth. Additionally, we conduct an ablation study for each of the two key components of SURW:
uniformity and selectivity. We implement two ablative variants, namely Non-Uniform (N-U) and Non-Selective (N-S),
to investigate the impact of each component in isolation.
4.2

statistical significance (𝑝 < 10−4 by Mann-Whitney U Test
[35]). More importantly, no other algorithm triggers bugs
that SURW fails to expose. We perform log-rank test [36] to
determine the algorithm that requires the least number of
schedules for bug discovery. With significance level 𝑝 < 0.05,
SURW claims the best performance on 26/35 targets. On 6 of
the other 9 targets, SURW requires only ≤ 10 schedules on
average to trigger the bug.

RQ1: Discovery of Bugs

To determine if our approach leads to better bug discovery,
we evaluate SURW and other algorithms on SCTBench [50],
ConVul [10] and RaceBenchData [48] Benchmarks.

RaceBenchData. In addition to the SCTBench and Convul
benchmarks, we evaluate the algorithms on the RaceBenchData benchmark [48]. For this dataset, we follow the RaceBench
[30] authors in using the total number of distinct bugs exposed as our metric for effectiveness. Each base program is
embedded with 100 bugs, which we execute for 5 × 104 iterations with each algorithm. For these benchmark programs,
we instantiate SURW’s interesting event set to be all accesses
to a random memory region that contains multiple shared
variables, whose combined counts are above a threshold.
We present our results in Table 2. Here we see that SURW
is able to expose 944 distinct bugs, followed closely by POS
at 885 bugs. Of the 15 programs, SURW finds the most unique
bugs in 11 of them, followed by POS which finds the most
bugs in 6 programs. PCT-3, PCT-10 and Random Walk don’t
find the most bugs for any of the evaluated programs.
We note that each program instance in this benchmark
contains multiple bugs, and that this can cause issues for
approaches that maintain an event count, such as SURW or
PCT. If a shallow bug causes the program execution to terminate early, the observed event counts may no longer be
representative for a non-crashing execution. These premature crashes may explain the relatively smaller difference
between SURW and POS as compared to the results from our
other two benchmarks.

SCTBench and ConVul. On SCTBench and ConVul, we
measure the number of schedules to the first exposure of a
bug, following prior work [65]. For a single session, we sample up to 104 schedules for each scheduling algorithm. We
conduct 20 such sessions for each program in these benchmarks. In the case of one particular program, SafeStack, we
instead sample 106 schedules per trial, as it has been proven
elusive in previous works [65, 70]. For concision, we omit
11 trivial programs from our results where all algorithms
sample the buggy schedule within 10 executions on average.
We greatly disadvantage SURW by choosing the interesting events Δ to be all accesses to a single randomly selected
shared variable. The variable we selectively explore with
SURW is picked with probability proportional to its total access count. Still, we find that even with no additional information about which events are interesting, SURW is extremely
successful in finding bugs.
We present the detailed breakdown for the number of
schedules required to expose each bug in Appendix A. Table
1 summarises the number of bugs found for each algorithm,
where “Total” refers to the the cumulative number of distinct bugs found across 20 sessions, and “Mean” refers to the
average number of bugs found in each session. SURW exposes
more bugs (34.90 on average) than other algorithms with
8

Surprisingly, both variants of PCT perform worse than
naive Random Walk on this benchmark. While inaccurate
count estimates also affect PCT, we attribute its poor performance predominantly to the characteristics of the injected
bugs. Specifically, many of these bugs are of high depth (up
to 12) and the execution traces are extremely long (up to
millions of events). The bound of PCT is proportional to 𝑛1𝑑
where 𝑛 is the trace length and 𝑑 is the depth.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

SURW outperforms comparable randomized CCT algorithms
by a large margin on three leading benchmarks, even with
only randomly selected interesting event sets.
To further understand the performance of different algorithms, we delve into the series of reorder examples from
SCTBench [50], where the number in the target name parameterizes the number of threads involved. A simplified
version of reorder_100 is shown in Figure 4. As few as one
context switch is sufficient to trigger the bug on line 8, by
switching to the checker thread immediately after any setter thread executes line 3. That does not imply the bug is
straightforward to trigger – the scheduler has to enforce that
no setter thread executes line 4 before the check on line 7.
Indeed, no other algorithm is able to find this bug even once
in any of the 20 × 104 runs we conducted.
As highlighted in Section 3.3, ordered tuples can be insufficient for bug manifestation, as other events (here, line 4
from another setter thread) could disable buggy behaviors
for correctly ordered tuples. On the other hand, POS exploits
partial order for concurrent reads and writes. However, as
setter threads are created first, they tend to execute first as
well. It is thus exponentially unlikely for the checker’s access
on 𝑏 enabled simultaneously with others’.
In contrast, SURW exposes the bug within 200 schedules on
average (see Appendix A). The probability to trigger this bug
1
is indeed ≈ 200
: after all accesses to variable 𝑏 are chosen as
interesting events Δ (with probability 12 ), it suffices for SURW
1
to schedule the checker thread first (with probability 100
).
With thread counts as future information, SURW is able to
dictate the first access to variable 𝑏 even before it is enabled.
4.3

static int a = 0 , b = 0;
void setter_thread () {
a = 1;
b = -1;
}
void checker_thread () {
if (!( a == 0 && b == 0) && !( a == 1 && b == -1)) {
assert (0); // Bug triggered
}
}
int main () {
int n_set = 99;
int n_check = 1;
for ( int i = 0; i < n_set ; i ++) {
std :: thread ( setter_thread );
}
for ( int i = 0; i < n_check ; i ++) {
std :: thread ( checker_thread );
}
return 0;
}

Figure 4. Simplified example of reorder_100 in SCTBench.

We conduct our ablation study on the SCTBench and Convul Benchmarks [10, 50]. A summary is presented in the
last two columns of Table 1, with full results shown in the
Appendix A. Both ablative versions fail to locate all bugs
found by full-fledged SURW.
Effect of uniformity. SURW shows nearly a strict improvement over N-U on the benchmark targets. On the series
of reorder programs (e.g. Figure 4), N-U performs notably
worse than SURW. This is because it suffers from a similar
pitfall as POS. More tellingly, uniformity exploits the duplicate and irrelevant threading pattern as discussed in Section 3.4. Consider reorder_20, which is a variant of Figure 4 that spawns 10 setter threads and 10 checker threads.
SURW samples the interleaving of each checker independently
with respect to all the setters, allowing it to consistently
crash reorder_20 in just 10 schedules, despite this example
having substantially more possible interleavings than other
threading configurations with comparable results, such as
reorder_3. In contrast, N-U requires > 500× as many schedules to find the bug on average.
Effect of selectivity. Selectivity allows SURW to focus on a
smaller subset of interesting events, and here we see it also
outperforms our ablative N-S algorithm by a wide margin. In
particular, SURW scales much better as the number of events
in the program execution increases. Most visibly, SURW could
crash programs with large numbers of threads (and thus
events) such as reorder_100 and twostage_100 within a
few hundred schedules on average, improving the performance of N-S by 5-10×. Moreover, N-S also lacks SURW’s
robustness when facing irrelevant events and locks. For example, SURW successfully triggers the bug in IWSQ by focusing
on a single variable with less than 30 accesses. N-S, however,
has to navigate through more than 3000 total events, many
of which are protected by locks. These locks can greatly

RQ2: Ablation Study

To assess how each component of SURW, namely uniformity
and selectivity, contributes to its performance, we conduct
an ablation study. We implement two ablative baselines to
compare with SURW. The first, Non-Uniform (N-U), uses the
same selectivity strategy and algorithm as SURW, but applies a
naive random walk to the interesting subset rather than URW
(line 9 of Algorithm 2). This setup demonstrates the impact
of our uniform sampling algorithm for the interesting subset.
The second, Non-Selective (N-S), applies URW to the entire
program; i.e. all events are considered interesting. This setup
shows the impact of selectivity for SURW.
9

reduce the number of possible interleavings, causing N-S’s
sampling weights to be misleading. To make matters worse,
the number of events unrelated to the bug fluctuates drastically as the control flow of the program changes, further
distorting the weights for N-S. SURW, on the other hand, is
largely unaffected when the correct variable is selected.
Both uniformity and selectivity significantly contribute to
SURW’s success; on the SCTBench and ConVul benchmarks
uniformity appears to have a slightly larger effect.
(a) Interleaving coverage

5

Case Study: LightFTP

In the case study, we investigate how SURW explores interleavings and behaviors of real-world software. We conduct
an in-depth case study with a production-ready web server,
LightFTP [31]. LightFTP is a popular implementation of a
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server, that has been widely
deployed for software distribution and data exchanges in
enterprise settings. Its integrity and reliability is extremely
crucial, as it facilitates direct file system operations for clients.
The server is multi-threaded in nature to accommodate concurrent client accesses. By design, it spawns a thread (and
possibly more worker threads) for each incoming connection. However, it has no built-in scheduler and the order of
request processing purely depends on the OS, making it a
perfect target for CCT tools.
To expose the multi-threaded behavior of the server, we
created 4 concurrent clients which all operate on a single
shared directory, each sending a randomly shuffled command
sequence.4 After authenticating itself, each client issues 3
utility commands, 3 MKD to create its own directories and 3
RMD to remove others’ directories – all in a random order.
Each client then sends one PASV-LIST request to fetch the
folder structure before disconnecting.
Here we are interested in both interleavings and behaviors
of the target: the interleavings are the temporal ordering of
file system accesses; and program behaviors are represented
by the final file structure returned by the last LIST command.
We investigate how well SURW explores the search space
on real-world programs, with the following two primary
metrics: (1) [coverage] the number of distinct interleavings
and behaviors witnessed; and (2) [uniformity] how evenly
are these interleavings and behaviors sampled.
We include PCT-3, PCT-10 and Random Walk for comparison. POS is excluded since the events do not involve
memory accesses. We also disadvantage SURW relative to others by granting naive selectivity for all algorithms, i.e., all
algorithms only need to schedule events relevant to the interleavings and the behaviors. Unlike the benchmarks used
in Section 4, program behaviors are fully determined by the

(b) Behavioral coverage

Figure 5. Interleaving (a) and behavioral (b) coverage for
LightFTP: # of distinct interleavings/behaviors vs # of schedules sampled. SURW achieves the highest coverage in both.
relative ordering of MKD and RMD pairs. This setup further favors PCT since it specializes in ordering patterns. We record
the results for 10k iterations in each trial, and repeat for 20
trials. The main results are shown in Figure 5 and Table 3.
Figure 5a and 5b shows the number of distinct interleavings5 and behaviors witnessed as the sample size increases,
respectively. The solid line depicts the mean and the shaded
region represents the standard deviation.
SURW consistently covers around 50% more interleavings
than Random Walk and 6× more than PCT-10 on average,
with a negligible variance. For program behaviors, SURW witnesses the most unique states of around 1000 in expectation.
However, it inflicts a high variance due to randomly shuffled
client commands. This suggests an unfortunate sensitivity of
interleaving sampling when exploring ordering patterns. Notably, despite exploring far fewer interleavings than Random
Walk, PCT-10 manages to explore more distinct behaviors
on average (though still fewer than SURW). This indicates
its efficacy in discovering different ordering patterns, but
also underscores why it suffers when the bug manifestation
requires more fine-grained dependencies between events.
Table 3 reports the Shannon Entropy of both the interleavings and behaviors observed. A larger entropy implies to a
5We only record the interleaving for two randomly selected clients, since

4 To facilitate automated testing, we modify the server to shut down after all

the full interleaving space is so large (> 1014 ) that no algorithm is likely to
sample the same interleaving more than once within our testing budget.

clients disconnect, instead of waiting for termination on keyboard inputs.
10

Table 3. Shannon Entropy of the distribution of interleavings
(top) and program behaviors (bottom) on LightFTP. A larger
entropy indicates a more even distribution.
Entropy
Interleavings
Behaviors

SURW

PCT-3

PCT-10

RW

8.57 ± 0.01
5.69 ± 0.64

3.81 ± 0.05
3.76 ± 0.06

4.80 ± 0.10
4.84 ± 0.10

7.17 ± 0.34
4.66 ± 0.17

example, explicitly incorporates the stateless POS algorithm
as a subroutine.
Systematic concurrency testing & model checking. To
explore the intractably large search space, systematic approaches often focus exclusively on a subspace, prioritize
certain execution patterns or employ reduction techniques.
CHESS [18, 43] focus on the preemption- or delay-bounded
space. Maple [69] employs shared memory access patterns
whereas Period [63] adopts thread switching patterns to partition the interleaving space. Model checking tools [9, 27]
assume a similar enumerative stance and often involve reduction techniques [1, 2, 4, 20]. Given sufficiently long time,
these techniques may formally prove the absence of bugs.
In contrast, SURW is highly lightweight and instead provides
probabilistic guarantees of hitting any buggy interleaving.
Therefore it is more scalable on large programs, and gives
incrementally stronger confidence to the system under test
as the sample size / time budget increases.

more even distribution. SURW displays the highest entropy in
both categories. This suggests that (1) SURW’s guarantee of interleaving uniformity translates well to real-world programs,
achieving a higher coverage and evenness; and (2) in practice,
this increased uniformity in the interleaving space leads to
increased uniformity in program behaviors observed.

6

Related Work

Randomized concurrency testing. Randomized concurrency testing algorithms opportunistically generate feasible
interleavings, often in a streaming fashion. SURW belongs
to the class of stateless algorithms, where each schedule is
independently sampled. These algorithms are lightweight,
portable, and often provide a probabilitic guarantee of hitting certain classes of bugs under some assumptions. Their
design and implementation typically imposes minimal overhead to the program execution. Notably, PCT [6] samples
from preemption-bounded interleavings to boost its success
probability [8, 34], and has been extended to a multi-core
[44] or message-passing [45] setup. RAPOS [51], POS [70]
and taPCT [46] incorporates partial order information when
making online decisions. We compare with the two most
prominent stateless CCT algorithms, namely PCT and POS,
in Section 4 and 5.
In contrast to stateless randomized CCT algorithms, stateful algorithmic frameworks, such as greybox-fuzzing [65] or
reinforcement learning [42], conduct an adaptive, biased random search. For example, RFF [65] enforces partial ordering
constraints guided by past executions (i.e. adaptive bias), and
instantiates the constraints with a stateless algorithm (i.e.
random). While these approaches can be extremely efficient
per schedule executed, they tend to be more heavyweight
due to the burden of additional information tracking during
and between executions. RFF maintains in-memory state
machines for each constraint at runtime and QL [42] must
maintain a set of all visited states in all previous executions.
In contrast, stateless algorithms only track a few integers of
per-thread event counts or priorities. Concretely, we benchmarked both RFF and our implementation of SURW on the
program in Figure 1, and each scheduling decision of RFF is
15× slower than that of SURW on average (305 ns versus 20
ns). We also remark that these approaches are orthogonal
to their stateless counterparts, as stateless algorithms can
be incorporated into adaptive search frameworks. RFF, for

Dynamic analyses. Dynamic concurrency bug detectors including sanitizers like TSan [54], aim to detect concurrency
issues from execution traces. Predictive analyses [25, 28, 37–
39, 53, 55, 58] enhance their bug finding capability by exploring reorderings of the observed interleaving under a
predefined notion of equivalence [19], without rerunning
the program. This allows effective detection of potential
data races [23, 25, 37, 47, 49], deadlocks [62], atomicity violations [40] and other properties [3, 21]. We note that these
techniques are intrinsically incomplete, as traces out of the
observed equivalence class are never accounted for. Moreover, traditional concurrency bugs such as data races are
often insufficient for bug manifestation [7, 32]. We believe
dynamic analyses and SURW are complementary to each other,
as they crave for a diverse and representative sample of interleavings and in return identify interesting events for SURW
to target.

7

Limitations

Accurate estimation of event counts. SURW leverages perthread event counts to achieve selective uniformity in the
interleaving space. However, we acknowledge that the problem of determining event counts is undecidable in general.
We note that the accuracy of the estimated counts can affect the effectiveness of our approach. Concretely, if a thread
𝑇𝑡 executes more events than its count estimate, the interleavings where events on 𝑇𝑡 happen early in the execution tend
to be under-sampled by SURW. We expect the algorithm to
function reasonably well only when the error in estimation
is not systematically biased towards certain threads, that is,
the relative ratio of the estimated counts of different threads
is not too far from the actual ratios.
In our evaluation (Section 4), we obtain these counts using
a single profiling run. Such an estimation can be inaccurate
11

when there is a large variance across the set of all runs, and
more exhaustive but heavyweight methods, such as Knuth’s
monte carlo estimation [26], can instead be employed to further improve the accuracy. For programs whose control flow
depends on the schedule, such as those involving spin locks,
the number of events may vary drastically. If these events
are of interest, their counts could be arbitrarily far-off from
the estimate, and as a result, scheduling decisions can be misled by distorted weights, leading to degraded performance
of SURW (see Non-Selective in Section 4.3). In practice, SURW
appears to be effective even with our simple event count
estimation, thanks to its selectivity. In particular, we note
that event counts are highly variable in the RaceBenchData
[30, 48] suite, where many variables are accessed only if
specific program paths are exercised. Nevertheless, in our
empirical evaluation, we observe that the core advantages of
SURW ensure that it outperforms other stateless algorithms.

Research Foundation, Singapore, and Cyber Security Agency
of Singapore.

References
[1] Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Mohamed Faouzi Atig, Bengt Jonsson, Magnus
Lång, Tuan Phong Ngo, and Konstantinos Sagonas. 2019. Optimal
stateless model checking for reads-from equivalence under sequential
consistency. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3,
OOPSLA (2019), 1–29.
[2] Pratyush Agarwal, Krishnendu Chatterjee, Shreya Pathak, Andreas
Pavlogiannis, and Viktor Toman. 2021. Stateless model checking under a reads-value-from equivalence. In International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification. Springer, 341–366.
[3] Zhendong Ang and Umang Mathur. 2024. Predictive Monitoring
against Pattern Regular Languages. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 8, POPL (2024), 2191–2225.
[4] Stavros Aronis, Bengt Jonsson, Magnus Lång, and Konstantinos Sagonas. 2018. Optimal dynamic partial order reduction with observers. In
International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems. Springer, 229–248.
[5] Christian Bienia, Sanjeev Kumar, Jaswinder Pal Singh, and Kai Li. 2008.
The PARSEC benchmark suite: Characterization and architectural
implications. In Proceedings of the 17th international conference on
Parallel architectures and compilation techniques. 72–81.
[6] Sebastian Burckhardt, Pravesh Kothari, Madanlal Musuvathi, and Santosh Nagarakatte. 2010. A randomized scheduler with probabilistic
guarantees of finding bugs. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture
News 38, 1 (2010), 167–178.
[7] Yan Cai, Biyun Zhu, Ruijie Meng, Hao Yun, Liang He, Purui Su, and Bin
Liang. 2019. Detecting concurrency memory corruption vulnerabilities.
In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering. 706–717.
[8] Dmitry Chistikov, Rupak Majumdar, and Filip Niksic. 2016. Hitting families of schedules for asynchronous programs. In Computer Aided Verification: 28th International Conference, CAV 2016, Toronto, ON, Canada,
July 17-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 28. Springer, 157–176.
[9] Edmund Clarke, Daniel Kroening, and Flavio Lerda. 2004. A tool for
checking ANSI-C programs. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems: 10th International Conference, TACAS
2004, Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and
Practice of Software, ETAPS 2004, Barcelona, Spain, March 29-April 2,
2004. Proceedings 10. Springer, 168–176.
[10] ConVul CVE dataset. 2019. https://github.com/mryancai/ConVul. Accessed 20-04-2024.
[11] Lucas Cordeiro and Bernd Fischer. 2011. Verifying multi-threaded
software using SMT-based context-bounded model checking. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering.
331–339.
[12] Microsoft Coyote. [n. d.]. GitHub - microsoft/coyote: Coyote is a library
and tool for testing concurrent Csharp code and deterministically
reproducing bugs. https://github.com/microsoft/coyote. Accessed
20-04-2024.
[13] CVE-2016-1972. 2016. Available from MITRE, CVE-ID CVE-2016-1972.
https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2016-1972
[14] CVE-2016-5195. 2016. Available from NIST, CVE-ID CVE-2016-5195.
https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/cve-2016-5195
[15] Karel De Loof, Hans De Meyer, and Bernard De Baets. 2006. Exploiting
the lattice of ideals representation of a poset. Fundamenta Informaticae
71, 2-3 (2006), 309–321.
[16] Gregory J Duck, Xiang Gao, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2020. Binary
rewriting without control flow recovery. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM
SIGPLAN conference on programming language design and implementation. 151–163.

Varied inputs, threads and other non-determinism. Our
experiments and case study are conducted on deterministic
programs with a fixed input, following prior works on concurrency testing [6, 63, 65]. The setup mimics a typical use
case of CCT techniques, where a given test case is executed
repeatedly to uncover bugs under different interleavings.
Consequently, the reported results may not extrapolate beyond this class of programs. For example, SURW is not directly
applicable if the number of threads varies, or if the execution depends on other source of non-determinism such as
environmental interactions.

8

Discussion

In this work, we construct a concurrency testing algorithm
from first principles. We endorse interleaving-uniformity
on appropriately selected events as a principled means to
achieve effective behavioral exploration. With this insight,
we develop a lightweight, yet highly effective algorithm,
which we demonstrate on a broad suite of concurrency
benchmarks. Looking forwards, we believe this approach
can be the basis for future CCT algorithms. We see great potential in combining stateless algorithms such as SURW with
their stateful counterparts or dynamic analysis techniques,
leading to further innovation in the research area.

9

Acknowledgments

We would like to sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd for their valuable feedback and insights
that helped us improve the quality of this paper. This research is supported by the National Research Foundation,
Singapore, and Cyber Security Agency of Singapore under
its National Cybersecurity R&D Programme (Fuzz Testing
<NRF-NCR25-Fuzz-0001>). Any opinions, findings and conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National
12

[17] Martin Dyer and Catherine Greenhill. 2000. The complexity of counting graph homomorphisms. Random Structures & Algorithms 17, 3-4
(2000), 260–289.
[18] Michael Emmi, Shaz Qadeer, and Zvonimir Rakamarić. 2011. Delaybounded scheduling. In Proceedings of the 38th annual ACM SIGPLANSIGACT symposium on principles of programming languages. 411–422.
[19] Azadeh Farzan and Umang Mathur. 2024. Coarser Equivalences for
Causal Concurrency. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 8, POPL (2024), 911–941.
[20] Cormac Flanagan and Patrice Godefroid. 2005. Dynamic partial-order
reduction for model checking software. ACM Sigplan Notices 40, 1
(2005), 110–121.
[21] Chujun Geng, Spyros Blanas, Michael D. Bond, and Yang Wang. 2024.
IsoPredict: Dynamic Predictive Analysis for Detecting Unserializable
Behaviors in Weakly Isolated Data Store Applications. Proc. ACM
Program. Lang. 8, PLDI, Article 161 (jun 2024), 25 pages. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3656391
[22] Patrice Godefroid. 1996. Partial-order methods for the verification of concurrent systems: an approach to the state-explosion problem. Springer.
[23] Jeff Huang, Patrick O’Neil Meredith, and Grigore Rosu. 2014. Maximal sound predictive race detection with control flow abstraction.
In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (Edinburgh, United Kingdom)
(PLDI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
337–348. https://doi.org/10.1145/2594291.2594315
[24] Nicholas Jalbert, Cristiano Pereira, Gilles Pokam, and Koushik Sen.
2011. {RADBench}: A Concurrency Bug Benchmark Suite. In 3rd
USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Parallelism (HotPar 11).
[25] Dileep Kini, Umang Mathur, and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2017. Dynamic
race prediction in linear time. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 52, 6 (2017), 157–
170.
[26] Donald E Knuth. 1975. Estimating the efficiency of backtrack programs.
Mathematics of computation 29, 129 (1975), 122–136.
[27] Michalis Kokologiannakis and Viktor Vafeiadis. 2021. GenMC: A
model checker for weak memory models. In International Conference
on Computer Aided Verification. Springer, 427–440.
[28] Rucha Kulkarni, Umang Mathur, and Andreas Pavlogiannis. 2021.
Dynamic Data-Race Detection Through the Fine-Grained Lens. In
32nd International Conference on Concurrency Theory (CONCUR 2021)
(Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), Vol. 203),
Serge Haddad and Daniele Varacca (Eds.). Schloss Dagstuhl – LeibnizZentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 16:1–16:23. https:
//doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.2021.16
[29] Nancy G Leveson and Clark S Turner. 1993. An investigation of the
Therac-25 accidents. Computer 26, 7 (1993), 18–41.
[30] Jiashuo Liang, Ming Yuan, Zhanzhao Ding, Siqi Ma, Xinhui Han, and
Chao Zhang. 2023. RaceBench: A Triggerable and Observable Concurrency Bug Benchmark. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Asia Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. 415–428.
[31] LightFTP. 2015. GitHub - hfiref0x/LightFTP: A small x86-32/x64 FTP
Server. https://github.com/hfiref0x/LightFTP. Accessed 01-05-2024.
[32] Changming Liu, Deqing Zou, Peng Luo, Bin B Zhu, and Hai Jin. 2018.
A heuristic framework to detect concurrency vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference.
529–541.
[33] Shan Lu, Soyeon Park, Eunsoo Seo, and Yuanyuan Zhou. 2008. Learning from mistakes: a comprehensive study on real world concurrency
bug characteristics. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference
on Architectural support for programming languages and operating
systems. 329–339.
[34] Rupak Majumdar and Filip Niksic. 2017. Why is random testing effective for partition tolerance bugs? Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 2, POPL (2017), 1–24.
[35] H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney. 1947. On a Test of Whether one
of Two Random Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other.

The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 18, 1 (1947), 50 – 60. https:
//doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730491
[36] Nathan Mantel. 1966. Evaluation of survival data and two new rank
order statistics arising in its consideration. Cancer Chemother Rep 50,
3 (1966), 163–170.
[37] Umang Mathur, Dileep Kini, and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2018. What
happens-after the first race? enhancing the predictive power of
happens-before based dynamic race detection. Proceedings of the ACM
on Programming Languages 2, OOPSLA (2018), 1–29.
[38] Umang Mathur, Andreas Pavlogiannis, and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2020.
The Complexity of Dynamic Data Race Prediction. In Proceedings of the
35th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (Saarbrücken, Germany) (LICS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 713–727. https://doi.org/10.1145/3373718.3394783
[39] Umang Mathur, Andreas Pavlogiannis, and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2021.
Optimal prediction of synchronization-preserving races. Proceedings
of the ACM on Programming Languages 5, POPL (2021), 1–29.
[40] Umang Mathur and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2020. Atomicity checking
in linear time using vector clocks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems. 183–199.
[41] Rolf H Möhring. 1989. Computationally tractable classes of ordered
sets. L. Rival, ed. Algorithms and Order.
[42] Suvam Mukherjee, Pantazis Deligiannis, Arpita Biswas, and Akash
Lal. 2020. Learning-based controlled concurrency testing. Proceedings
of the ACM on Programming Languages 4, OOPSLA (2020), 1–31.
[43] Madanlal Musuvathi, Shaz Qadeer, Thomas Ball, Gerard Basler, Piramanayagam Arumuga Nainar, and Iulian Neamtiu. 2008. Finding and
Reproducing Heisenbugs in Concurrent Programs. In Proceedings of
the 8th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (San Diego, California) (OSDI’08). USENIX Association, USA,
267–280.
[44] Santosh Nagarakatte, Sebastian Burckhardt, Milo MK Martin, and
Madanlal Musuvathi. 2012. Multicore acceleration of priority-based
schedulers for concurrency bug detection. In Proceedings of the 33rd
ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation. 543–554.
[45] Burcu Kulahcioglu Ozkan, Rupak Majumdar, Filip Niksic, Mitra Tabaei
Befrouei, and Georg Weissenbacher. 2018. Randomized testing of
distributed systems with probabilistic guarantees. Proceedings of the
ACM on Programming Languages 2, OOPSLA (2018), 1–28.
[46] Burcu Kulahcioglu Ozkan, Rupak Majumdar, and Simin Oraee. 2019.
Trace aware random testing for distributed systems. Proceedings of
the ACM on Programming Languages 3, OOPSLA (2019), 1–29.
[47] Andreas Pavlogiannis. 2019. Fast, sound, and effectively complete
dynamic race prediction. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages 4, POPL (2019), 1–29.
[48] RaceBenchData. 2023. RaceBenchData: a synthetic concurrency bug
dataset. https://github.com/rb130/RaceBenchData. Accessed 20-042024.
[49] Jake Roemer, Kaan Genç, and Michael D Bond. 2020. SmartTrack: efficient predictive race detection. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation. 747–
762.
[50] SCTBench. 2016. SCTBench: a set of C/C++ pthread benchmarks for
evaluating concurrency testing techniques. https://github.com/mcimperial/sctbench. Accessed 2024-04-01.
[51] Koushik Sen. 2007. Effective random testing of concurrent programs.
In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE/ACM international conference on Automated software engineering. 323–332.
[52] Koushik Sen and Gul Agha. 2006. A race-detection and flipping algorithm for automated testing of multi-threaded programs. In Haifa
verification conference. Springer, 166–182.

13

[53] Traian Florin Şerbănuţă, Feng Chen, and Grigore Roşu. 2013. Maximal causal models for sequentially consistent systems. In Runtime
Verification: Third International Conference, RV 2012, Istanbul, Turkey,
September 25-28, 2012, Revised Selected Papers 3. Springer, 136–150.
[54] Konstantin Serebryany and Timur Iskhodzhanov. 2009. ThreadSanitizer: Data Race Detection in Practice. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Binary Instrumentation and Applications (New York, New York,
USA) (WBIA ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 62–71. https://doi.org/10.1145/1791194.1791203
[55] Zheng Shi, Umang Mathur, and Andreas Pavlogiannis. 2024. Optimistic
Prediction of Synchronization-Reversal Data Races. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering
(Lisbon, Portugal) (ICSE ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 134, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3597503.3639099
[56] Shuttle. 2021. GitHub - awslabs/shuttle: a library for testing concurrent
Rust code. https://github.com/awslabs/shuttle. Accessed 20-04-2024.
[57] A.Prasad Sistla. 2004. Employing symmetry reductions in model checking. Computer Languages, Systems & Structures 30, 3 (2004), 99–137.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cl.2004.02.002 Analysis and Verification.
[58] Yannis Smaragdakis, Jacob Evans, Caitlin Sadowski, Jaeheon Yi, and
Cormac Flanagan. 2012. Sound Predictive Race Detection in Polynomial Time. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Philadelphia, PA,
USA) (POPL ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 387–400. https://doi.org/10.1145/2103656.2103702
SweynTooth: Bluetooth Vulnerabilities
[59] SweynTooth. 2020.
Expose Many Devices to Attacks – Securityweek.com. https:
//www.securityweek.com/sweyntooth-bluetooth-vulnerabilitiesexpose-many-devices-attacks/.
[60] Topi Talvitie, Kustaa Kangas, Teppo Niinimäki, and Mikko Koivisto.
2018. Counting linear extensions in practice: MCMC versus exponential Monte Carlo. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Vol. 32.
[61] Paul Thomson, Alastair F Donaldson, and Adam Betts. 2016. Concurrency testing using controlled schedulers: An empirical study. ACM

Transactions on Parallel Computing (TOPC) 2, 4 (2016), 1–37.
[62] Hünkar Can Tunç, Umang Mathur, Andreas Pavlogiannis, and Mahesh Viswanathan. 2023. Sound Dynamic Deadlock Prediction in
Linear Time. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, PLDI, Article 177 (jun 2023),
26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3591291
[63] Cheng Wen, Mengda He, Bohao Wu, Zhiwu Xu, and Shengchao Qin.
2022. Controlled concurrency testing via periodical scheduling. In
Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering.
474–486.
[64] PETER Winkler and G Brifhtwell. 1991. Counting linear extensions.
Order 8, e (1991), 225–242.
[65] Dylan Wolff, Zheng Shi, Gregory J Duck, Umang Mathur, and Abhik
Roychoudhury. 2024. Greybox Fuzzing for Concurrency Testing. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2.
482–498.
[66] Steven Cameron Woo, Moriyoshi Ohara, Evan Torrie, Jaswinder Pal
Singh, and Anoop Gupta. 1995. The SPLASH-2 programs: Characterization and methodological considerations. ACM SIGARCH computer
architecture news 23, 2 (1995), 24–36.
[67] Yu Yang, Xiaofang Chen, and Ganesh Gopalakrishnan. 2008. Inspect: A
runtime model checker for multithreaded C programs. Technical Report.
Technical Report UUCS-08-004, University of Utah.
[68] Jie Yu and Satish Narayanasamy. 2009. A case for an interleaving constrained shared-memory multi-processor. ACM SIGARCH Computer
Architecture News 37, 3 (2009), 325–336.
[69] Jie Yu, Satish Narayanasamy, Cristiano Pereira, and Gilles Pokam. 2012.
Maple: A coverage-driven testing tool for multithreaded programs.
In Proceedings of the ACM international conference on Object oriented
programming systems languages and applications. 485–502.
[70] Xinhao Yuan, Junfeng Yang, and Ronghui Gu. 2018. Partial order
aware concurrency sampling. In Computer Aided Verification: 30th
International Conference, CAV 2018, Held as Part of the Federated Logic
Conference, FloC 2018, Oxford, UK, July 14-17, 2018, Proceedings, Part II
30. Springer, 317–335.

14

A

Mean Number of Schedules to 1st Bug

Table 4. Full results on SCTBench and ConVul: the number of schedules to 1st bug exposure (mean ± standard deviation).
Results are indicative of the time to exposure (TTE). A smaller number indicates the algorithm is able to expose bugs faster.
Target
CS/twostage
CS/twostage_20
CS/twostage_50
CS/twostage_100
CS/reorder_3
CS/reorder_4
CS/reorder_5
CS/reorder_10
CS/reorder_20
CS/reorder_50
CS/reorder_100
CS/stack
CS/deadlock01
CS/token_ring
CS/lazy01
CS/bluetooth_driver
CS/account
CS/wronglock
CS/wronglock_3
CB/stringbuffer-jdk1.4
Chess/IWSQ
Chess/IWSQWithState
Chess/SWSQ
Chess/WSQ
Inspect/bbuf
Inspect/boundedBuffer
Inspect/qsort_mt
RADBench/bug4
RADBench/bug5
RADBench/bug6
SafeStack†
ConVul/CVE-2013-1792
ConVul/CVE-2016-1972
ConVul/CVE-2016-1973
ConVul/CVE-2016-7911
ConVul/CVE-2016-9806
ConVul/CVE-2017-15265
ConVul/CVE-2017-6346

SURW

PCT-3

PCT-10

POS

Random
Walk

Non
Uniform

Non
Selective

8±4
6±3
20 ± 17
454 ± 444
7±7
7±6
10 ± 9
17 ± 11
6±4
13 ± 12
194 ± 214
5±3
2±0
8±6
2±0
70 ± 55
6±5
7±7
9±9
8±7
6±5
6±5
7±6
6±4
−
9±7
3048 ± 2669∗
23 ± 24
−
4±3
368921 ± 329371∗
15 ± 13
11 ± 8
5±3
8±9
3±2
−
15 ± 10

13 ± 14
159 ± 151
1676 ± 1715
7466 ± 831∗
185 ± 199
554 ± 643
647 ± 517
3225 ± 2426∗
3005 ± 2680
3304 ± 1721∗
−
3±2
13 ± 12
8±6
5±3
112 ± 73
4±2
51 ± 50
58 ± 46
281 ± 261
48 ± 36
907 ± 740
842 ± 679
48 ± 49
−
20 ± 18
3004 ± 2787∗
1973 ± 2668∗
−
42 ± 39
−
95 ± 83
4902 ± 2391∗
10 ± 8
20 ± 18
7±6
−
24 ± 18

9 ± 10
101 ± 92
692 ± 392
5726 ± 2591∗
148 ± 191
362 ± 213
1094 ± 1216
4462 ± 3266∗
3297 ± 2877∗
−
−
3±1
7±6
8±8
5±3
83 ± 86
4±3
20 ± 20
14 ± 10
26 ± 24
13 ± 14
204 ± 220
199 ± 216
16 ± 14
−
6±4
4714 ± 2931∗
1044 ± 1440
−
21 ± 21
−
50 ± 61
2712 ± 2704∗
6±3
15 ± 15
4±3
−
20 ± 19

15 ± 12
156 ± 137
1637 ± 1385
6674 ± 2877∗
86 ± 70
533 ± 651
2169 ± 2182
−
−
−
−
2±1
4±3
9 ± 11
5±3
36 ± 29
4±3
10 ± 14
11 ± 14
23 ± 19
14 ± 11
5±4
6±5
12 ± 7
−
5±4
3689 ± 2997∗
240 ± 185
−
18 ± 10
−
39 ± 33
34 ± 34
5±4
11 ± 9
7±5
−
10 ± 9

464 ± 581
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
176 ± 136
3±3
13 ± 13
21 ± 21
215 ± 225
18 ± 24
36 ± 42
36 ± 42
2243 ± 2324∗
−
26 ± 28
−
−
−
7±7
3442 ± 2806∗
1688 ± 1590∗
−
48 ± 46
−
364 ± 289
299 ± 256
308 ± 333
3±2
2209 ± 2065
−
3±4

8±5
172 ± 164
1834 ± 1894
−
26 ± 20
53 ± 45
152 ± 118
4358 ± 3358∗
3783 ± 3345∗
−
−
5±4
4±3
10 ± 7
6±3
70 ± 55
7±4
4±3
5±4
8±6
40 ± 42
7±5
15 ± 11
33 ± 33
−
8±6
2392 ± 1718
48 ± 51
−
6±4
−
24 ± 25
12 ± 9
5±4
16 ± 12
6±5
−
9±7

9±8
24 ± 28
93 ± 58
2992 ± 2589∗
24 ± 23
22 ± 27
27 ± 28
74 ± 65
10 ± 9
75 ± 62
3785 ± 3062∗
986 ± 1163∗
3±1
9±6
4±2
1494 ± 1474∗
3±1
4±1
5±2
834 ± 608
428 ± 742
1367 ± 1581∗
5 ± 3∗
13 ± 10
−
7±5
297 ± 209
438 ± 609
−
5±4
−
141 ± 228
34 ± 28
17 ± 23
6±8
4±2
−
2±0

Each cell shows the # of schedules (mean ± standard deviation) to the 1st bug across 20 sessions
Results include 1 trial run schedule required for SURW, PCT-3, PCT-10, Non-Uniform and Non-Selective
† SafeStack is run for 106 iterations for each algorithm (up from 104 )
− indicates the bug is not triggered across all sessions
∗ indicates the bug is not triggered in at least 1 session
bold indicates the best result on the target with statistic significance (by log-rank test [36], 𝑝 < 0.05)

15

B

Artifact Appendix

B.1

Abstract

B.3.3 Software dependencies. A recent version of Ubuntu
with admin privileges. Bash, Docker, plus Python3 and a few
package dependencies.

The SURW artifact mainly includes a dynamic library that (1)
wraps pthread functions to serialize the execution of concurrent programs, and (2) controls thread scheduling with SURW
as well as other stateless scheduling algorithms evaluated
in the paper. In addition, there is a binary instrumentation
tool that invokes the dynamic library at every instruction
involving memory operations. These functionalities are implemented using Zig, C/C++ and Python.
This artifact also contains the containerized setup for targets used in the evaluation and case study section, and all
raw data and scripts generate all figures and tables presented
in the paper. Convenience scripts are provided for reproducing the results for the following subject: (1) An experiment
comparing SURW to other algorithms and ablative versions
on two widely used benchmark suites in terms of schedulesto-first-bug; (2) An experiment comparing SURW to other
algorithms on another benchmark in terms of the total number of bugs found; and (3) A case study comparing SURW to
other algorithms on a real-world protocol server in terms of
coverage and uniformity.
The recommended software dependencies are recent version of Ubuntu with Docker, Python3 and bash. The experiment requires disabled address space layout randomization
(ASLR). A modern 8 core machine should be able to finish
the experiments within 3 days.
B.2

B.3.4 Data sets. All raw data used in the paper is included
in the artifact under the stats directory.
B.4

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Algorithm: Algorithm 2
• Program: SCTBench [50] and ConVul [10] curated by [63],
RaceBenchData [48], LightFTP [31]
• Transformations: binary rewriting tool E9Patch [16]
• Run-time environment: Linux (Docker)
• Metrics: Schedules to 1st bug, interleaving and behavioral
coverage, Shannon entropy
• Output: Json files, LATEX files, graphs
• Experiments: Bash and Python scripts
• How much disk space required (approximately)?: <30
GB for all Docker images combined; <8 GB for the largest
image alone if the each image is built separately.
• How much time is needed to prepare workflow (approximately)?: 1-3 hours to build Docker images
• How much time is needed to complete experiments
(approximately)?: Around 3 days on a typical 8 core CPU
• Publicly available?: Yes
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: MIT
• Archived (provide DOI)?: Yes, via
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27627123

B.3
B.3.1

Installation

Note that installation steps and scripts assume a recent version of Ubuntu (e.g., 20.04). These steps can be adapted to
other Linux distros with some modifications of the bash
scripts and commands below.
1. Install Docker and Python3:
sudo snap install docker
sudo groupadd docker
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
sudo apt install -y python3
2. Clone E9Patch [16]:
git clone git@github.com:GJDuck/e9patch.git
cd e9patch; git checkout b4e7175; cd ..
3. Install Python dependencies:
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
4. Run ./build_all.sh to build all Docker containers.
5. Run the following command to disable address space
layout randomization (ASLR):
echo 0 | \
sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space
Note: your system will be more vulnerable to exploits while
ASLR is disabled. ASLR will be reinstated on reboot.
B.5

Experiment workflow

The experiments can be run with convenience scripts on
the host OS, which invoke multiple Docker containers in
isolation and save the collected results to the stats directory.
When started, each Docker container runs the target up to
a fixed number of iterations. The compiled version of the
dynamic library and target programs are constructed when
building the Docker images.
B.6

Evaluation and expected results

All experiments should produce comparable, if not identical,
results as reported in the paper.
SCTBench and ConVul. The experiment can be rerun with
python3 scripts/eval/run_period.py
Table 1 and Table 4 (in Appendix A) can be generated from
saved (or new) results using
python3 scripts/analyze/eval_period.py

Description
How to access. Via the DOI link above.

RaceBenchData. The experiment can be rerun with

B.3.2 Hardware dependencies. An x86 CPU and at least
8 GB of RAM. More cores will make the experiments faster
with parallelism, but are not necessary.
16

README.md file in the artifact for more detailed explanations.
However, we note that the artifact is a research prototype
that is still under development, and that some customization
options may not be stable.

python3 scripts/eval/run_racebench.py
Table 2 can be generated from saved (or new) results using
python3 scripts/analyze/eval_racebench.py
LightFTP. The case study can be rerun with
python3 scripts/eval/run_lftp.py
Table 3 and two sub-figures of Figure 5 can be generated
from saved (or new) results using
python3 scripts/analyze/plot_lftp_a.py
python3 scripts/analyze/plot_lftp_b.py
B.7

B.8

Notes

Please run all convenience scripts and commands from the
documentation at the base directory of the artifact. The experiments are run with fixed random seeds, which in principle
should produce consistent results. However, it is possible to
have slight variations in the results due to different system
environments or workloads.

Experiment customization

The dynamic library supports a wide range of customization options. The artifact contains configuration files for
many stateless CCT algorithms, some of which are not discussed in the paper. For example, it supports different implementations of pickFrom() in Algorithm 2. Additionally, it
supports selecting different events as interesting for SURW,
such as accesses to specified memory addresses, locks or
sched_yield() calls. Interested readers may refer to the

B.9

Methodology

Submission, reviewing and badging methodology:
• https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-reviewbadging
• http://cTuning.org/ae/submission-20201122.html
• http://cTuning.org/ae/reviewing-20201122.html

17

