Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for
Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads
Wei Zhao†

arXiv:2410.07381v3 [cs.DC] 28 Feb 2025

Stanford University
Stanford, USA
CentML
Toronto, Canada
wzhao@cs.stanford.edu

Anand Jayarajan

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
CentML
Toronto, Canada
anandj@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
GPU underutilization is a significant concern in many production deep learning clusters, leading to prolonged job
queues and increased operational expenses. A promising
solution to this inefficiency is GPU sharing, which improves
resource utilization by allowing multiple workloads to execute concurrently on a single GPU. However, deploying GPU
sharing in production settings faces critical obstacles due to
the limitations of existing mechanisms, including high integration costs, inadequate performance isolation, and limited
application compatibility. To address these issues, we introduce Tally, a non-intrusive GPU sharing mechanism that
provides robust performance isolation and comprehensive
workload compatibility. The key to Tally’s robust performance isolation capability lies in its fine-grained threadblock-level GPU kernel scheduling strategy, which allows
the system to effectively mitigate interference caused by
workload co-execution. We evaluate Tally on a diverse range
of workloads and show that it incurs an average overhead
of only 7.2% on the 99𝑡ℎ -percentile latency of high-priority
inference tasks when executed concurrently with best-effort
training workloads, compared to 188.9% overhead exhibited
by the state-of-the-art GPU sharing systems like TGS, while
achieving over 80% of TGS’s system throughput.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Concurrent algorithms; Artificial intelligence; • Computer systems organization → Parallel architectures.
Keywords: GPU sharing, performance isolation, cloud infrastructure, deep learning, systems for machine learning
† Part of the work done as a student at the University of Toronto.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707282

Gennady Pekhimenko

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
CentML
Toronto, Canada
pekhimenko@cs.toronto.edu

ACM Reference Format:
Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2025. Tally:
Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning
Workloads. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3669940.3707282

1

INTRODUCTION

Deep learning (DL) has demonstrated astonishing performance across a wide range of applications, including image recognition [29, 33, 60], machine translation [7, 22, 35,
59], recommendation systems [3, 76], and autonomous driving [15, 73]. Recent advances in generative AI [11, 54], exemplified by the development of large language models (LLMs)
such as ChatGPT [47], have further elevated the influence
of DL to unprecedented levels. To facilitate the research
and deployment of DL-based applications, many organizations [34, 56, 67] are investing in building computing infrastructures with large fleets of GPU devices. For example, Meta
has built two data center-scale clusters for AI, each equipped
with hundreds of thousands of NVIDIA H100 GPUs with an
estimated cost as high as half a billion dollars [24, 34]. As the
demand for computational resources continues to escalate,
efficient utilization of GPUs becomes paramount to mitigate
costs and ensure scalability for AI applications.
Nevertheless, studies have noted significant GPU underutilization in large-scale DL clusters. For example, a recent study
by Alibaba revealed that the median GPU utilization in their
production DL cluster was only 4.2% [67]. This inefficiency
arises from the need for production clusters to accommodate
a diverse range of workloads, many of which are unable
to fully utilize the capacity of GPUs. Training workloads,
for instance, may underutilize GPUs due to bottlenecks in
CPU execution such as stalls caused by data fetching and
preprocessing [6]. On the other hand, the utilization of online inference tasks is intrinsically tied to real-time request
rates, which are subject to substantial fluctuations causing
unpredictable GPU idleness [38]. For example, Microsoft’s
production trace [77] has revealed significant burstiness in

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

user requests, with frequent spikes in demand up to 50× the
average. This makes usage prediction and resource allocation
challenging for inference workloads, resulting in resource
over-provisioning to ensure high quality of service [38, 74],
which exacerbates the underutilization problem.
To enhance the efficiency of DL clusters, recent studies [31, 41, 70, 71] suggest GPU sharing as a promising solution. This approach aims to enhance hardware utilization
by allowing multiple low-utilization tasks to share a single
GPU’s resources. The same Alibaba study conducted a simulation on their production traces and demonstrated that an
effective GPU sharing mechanism could reduce the amount
of GPU resources required by the cluster by 50% on average,
with reductions reaching up to 73% during peak demand periods. These findings underscore the potential of GPU sharing
to mitigate GPU underutilization and significantly improve
the efficiency of large-scale DL clusters.
Despite these promising results, GPU sharing has not yet
achieved widespread adoption in production. One major obstacle is the lack of robust performance isolation mechanisms
in most current GPU sharing systems. Many workloads in
DL clusters are governed by service-level agreements (SLAs)
with strict performance requirements, often measured in milliseconds [18]. These workloads are commonly referred to as
high-priority or latency-critical tasks. In contrast, workloads
that can tolerate extended processing times are known as
low-priority or best-effort tasks. While it seems logical to pack
best-efforts tasks along with high-priority tasks to utilize
potential GPU idle time, this approach can cause significant
interference to the performance of high-priority workloads,
violating their SLAs. Our experiments on state-of-the-art
GPU sharing mechanisms reveal that such interference can
cause up to a 20× slowdown in tail latency (see Section 5),
making them impractical for production.
Another hindrance to the broader adoption of GPU sharing lies in the intrusive nature of many existing solutions [4,
13, 14, 70, 71, 79]. These systems often necessitate extensive modifications to user code or the underlying DL frameworks (e.g., PyTorch [49], TensorFlow [2]). Such requirements not only greatly limit users’ flexibility in developing
workloads but also impose substantial burdens on users and
cluster providers for workload adaptation and framework
upgrades, leading to considerable integration and maintenance costs [31]. Moreover, many of these solutions require
the workloads to adhere to specific characteristics, such as
ensuring GPU kernels used by the workload are always idempotent [28]. These constraints significantly limit their applicability in production clusters, which typically host a diverse
range of workloads with heterogeneous characteristics.
In light of these observations, we argue that for practical
deployment in production DL clusters, a GPU sharing system
must meet the following three criteria: (1) it must be nonintrusive to seamlessly integrate into existing clusters and
DL workloads, (2) provide performance isolation guarantees

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

to ensure that the SLAs of high-priority tasks are effectively
maintained during shared execution, and (3) be generalizable
across a diverse range of DL applications. Building on these
objectives, we propose Tally, a novel non-intrusive GPU
sharing system for large-scale production DL clusters that
ensures robust performance isolation for high-priority tasks
when co-located with best-effort workloads, while maximizing hardware efficiency and overall system throughput. We
design Tally as a transparent virtualization layer between
the application level and the GPU. It intercepts GPU kernel
launch API calls and employs a task-agnostic scheduling
strategy that prioritizes the execution of high-priority kernels while opportunistically scheduling best-effort kernels
during GPU idle periods.
To efficiently co-locate high-priority and best-effort tasks
on a GPU with performance isolation guarantees, it is essential to schedule best-effort kernels in a controlled manner
when the GPU is idle and promptly switch to high-priority
kernels when needed. However, modern GPUs lack kernel
scheduling primitives to terminate a running kernel and
only allow context switching between kernels at the granularity of entire kernels [25, 28]. This limitation introduces
significant overhead on high-priority tasks, especially since
many best-effort DL workloads involve long-running kernels. To overcome this challenge and enable finer-grained
kernel scheduling, Tally uses two block-level kernel scheduling primitives: slicing and preemption. Slicing divides large
kernels into smaller segments, while preemption allows for
the interruption of active kernels. Our key insight is that
these two scheduling primitives can be implemented in a
non-intrusive and task-agnostic manner through a series
of GPU kernel transformation passes, leveraging the GPU
programming model which organizes kernels as collections
of independent thread blocks.
While slicing and preemption are effective mechanisms
to manage co-execution interference, each has its trade-offs.
Kernel slicing is a lightweight transformation but can incur
higher overhead due to multiple kernel launches. In contrast, kernel preemption requires only a single kernel launch
but involves a more complex transformation with potential synchronization overhead. Due to these differences, the
optimal choice of scheduling primitives and configuration
parameters (e.g., the degree of slicing) varies across different
kernels. Towards this end, Tally uses a profile-guided resource provisioning strategy in its scheduling algorithm that
transparently profiles the performance of best-effort kernels
on-the-fly across various scheduling configurations to select
the best option that meets the latency requirements of the
high-priority task. This approach ensures that interference
from best-effort tasks remains within acceptable limits while
striving for optimal system throughput.
To evaluate Tally’s ability to provide effective performance
isolation, we prepare a comprehensive benchmark suite consisting of six training and six inference workloads that cover

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

a wide range of popular DL models and frameworks (details
shown in table 2). We evaluate the co-located performance of
latency-critical inference tasks and best-effort training tasks
by simulating the production traffic patterns for the inference
tasks using the publicly available Microsoft Azure Function
Trace 2021 (MAF2) dataset [77]. Across all the combinations,
Tally incurs a mere 7.2% overhead on average in the 99𝑡ℎ percentile latency of inference tasks, compared to 252.3%,
345.0%, 195.5%, and 188.9% exhibited by state-of-the-art nonintrusive GPU sharing solutions, Time-Slicing [25], MPS,
MPS-Priority [1], and TGS [68] respectively. At the same
time, Tally is able to achieve 80% of the system throughput
attained by TGS, demonstrating the effectiveness of Tally
in maximizing the GPU efficiency while providing strong
performance isolation guarantees.
In summary, we make the following contributions.
• We propose Tally, a non-intrusive GPU sharing solution with robust performance isolation guarantees.
• We introduce a novel approach to achieve fine-grained
GPU kernel scheduling in a non-intrusive and taskagnostic manner using kernel slicing and preemption
primitives. We further propose a priority-aware kernel scheduler that dynamically selects the appropriate
scheduling primitives to optimize GPU throughput
while upholding performance isolation guarantees.
• We evaluate Tally on a diverse range of training and
inference workloads and show that Tally can achieve
system throughput on-par with state-of-the-art GPU
sharing solutions while ensuring strong performance
isolation.

2

BACKGROUND

Modern large-scale DL clusters are commonly shared among
numerous users within an organization and are designed to
support a diverse range of workloads [31, 70]. These include
training, fine-tuning, and inference tasks for a variety of
model architectures, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [29, 50], transformer-based large language models
(LLMs) [9, 22, 62], graph neural networks (GNNs) [63, 72],
and reinforcement learning (RL) models [55, 57]. These workloads are implemented using various DL frameworks, including widely adopted open-source platforms like PyTorch [49],
TensorFlow [2], and JAX [10], as well as proprietary software stacks [67]. Given the diversity and compute-intensive
nature of DL workloads, general-purpose GPUs have become
the predominant accelerator in DL clusters for their expressive programming model and massive parallel processing
capabilities.
GPU architecture and programming model. Despite variations across vendors (e.g, NVIDIA, AMD), the core architecture and programming model of modern GPUs in DL clusters
remain largely similar. GPUs are composed of hundreds of
parallel processing units called Streaming Multiprocessors

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Kernel
B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

…

gridDim: (x1, y1, z1) blockDim: (x2, y2, z2)

Thread Block

blockIdx

W

W

W

Warp threadIdx

W

W

W

…

W

W

…

32 Threads

Figure 1. Overview of the GPU programming model.

(SMs). The computational tasks executed on GPUs, known
as kernels, are programmed using specialized languages like
CUDA [44]. As illustrated in Figure 1, GPU kernels follow
a hierarchical thread group structure consisting of threads,
warps, thread blocks, and grids. Threads within a kernel identify themselves using built-in variables such as threadIdx and
blockIdx to determine their task assignments. Threads within
a warp execute instructions in a SIMT (Single Instruction,
Multiple Threads) fashion, where multiple threads execute
the same instruction on different pieces of data simultaneously. All warps within a thread-block are scheduled onto
a single SM, enabling them to share data using fast on-chip
shared memory. Additionally, threads within a block can
synchronize their execution using synchronization primitives to coordinate memory accesses. Finally, thread blocks
within a grid can be scheduled and executed independently
in any order, either sequentially or in parallel [44]. This independent scheduling capability allows thread blocks to scale
effectively across multiple SMs.
GPU sharing systems. The diverse nature of DL workloads, coupled with their inherent inefficiencies, has led to
significant concerns about GPU underutilization in many
production DL clusters [30, 70]. To address this challenge,
researchers have proposed numerous cluster-level optimizations [65, 69–71], among which GPU sharing has emerged as
a promising approach to improve utilization by consolidating
multiple low-utilization jobs onto the same GPU. From an
implementation perspective, current GPU sharing solutions
can be broadly categorized into two levels: application-level
and runtime-level approaches. Application-level solutions
typically involve the introduction of new programming interfaces designed for concurrent DL execution. For example,
Salus [71] exposes a set of scheduling primitives for defining
the iteration boundaries of a training job, enabling the scheduler to manage different training workloads at the iterationlevel granularity. Similarly, HFTA [65] provides APIs that
enable developers to group multiple hyper-parameter tuning
jobs into a single application, facilitating efficient execution
on a single GPU.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

In contrast to application-level solutions that require modifications to user-level applications, runtime-level GPU sharing solutions operate transparently by integrating directly
into either DL frameworks [70] (e.g., PyTorch [49], TensorFlow [2]), container orchestration systems [68] (e.g., Kubernetes [26]), or the GPU driver [1, 28, 46]. For example,
NVIDIA GPUs provide two built-in driver-level concurrency
mechanisms: Time-Slicing [25] and MPS [1], which enable
transparent sharing of GPU resources in temporal and spatial
manners respectively. Additionally, NVIDIA’s Multi-Instance
GPU (MIG) [46] introduces hardware-level resource partitioning primitives that divide GPU resources, such as SMs,
cache, and memory bandwidth, into multiple virtual GPU
instances, each operating within an isolated environment.
Besides vendor-provided solutions, TGS [68] integrates with
Kubernetes to schedule workloads at the GPU kernel level,
while REEF [28] extends the GPU driver to offer more finegrained thread-level scheduling capabilities. The transparent
design of these solutions facilitates broader adoption across
applications. However, designing these solutions is often
challenging due to the lack of application-level context.

3

GPU SHARING IN THE WILD

Despite the wide range of solutions, current GPU sharing systems are inadequate for practical deployment in DL clusters
due to one or more of the following key limitations.
High integration and maintenance cost. Many existing
GPU sharing systems are fundamentally intrusive in nature,
necessitating extensive modifications to user code to be used
in practice. This is particularly evident in application-level
systems, where users must adapt their workloads to the specific programming interfaces proposed by these solutions.
Such intrusive approaches not only burden the users, but
also limit their flexibility in application development [31].
Similarly, runtime-level GPU sharing solutions that are designed as extensions of DL frameworks impose a significant
burden on cluster managers to implement and maintain them
across diverse frameworks used by the users. Consequently,
deploying these solutions in practice often involves substantial integration and maintenance costs, especially given the
rapidly evolving landscape of modern DL ecosystem.
On the other hand, while runtime-level GPU sharing solutions that integrate seamlessly with container orchestration
systems or the GPU driver may appear non-intrusive, they
often impose implicit requirements on user code to provide
additional application contexts needed for making effective
scheduling decisions. These include the ability to temporarily launch applications in a specialized profiling environment
prior to full execution [58], or mandating applications to implement checkpoint and restart mechanisms to support live
migration [42, 69]. However, enforcing such programming
practices in large-scale, multi-tenant clusters is often impractical due to the operational complexity it introduces [67].

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

Table 1. Comparison of BERT inference latency against turnaround latency of different scheduling granularity for Whisper training on NVIDIA A100 GPU.
Inference time
(BERT)
3.93𝑚𝑠

Turnaround latency (Whisper)
Iteration Kernel
Block Thread
∼ 3𝑠
∼ 10𝑚𝑠 ∼ 304𝜇𝑠 ∼ 38𝜇𝑠

Lack of performance isolation guarantees. In production
DL clusters, many inference tasks are governed by servicelevel agreements (SLAs), which impose strict stringent requirements on their response times, typically ranging from
a few milliseconds to seconds [18]. However, current GPU
sharing solutions often fall short in providing adequate performance isolation, leading to severe performance degradation for latency-critical inference tasks when co-located
with other workloads [25]. For instance, NVIDIA MPS [1]
is designed to eagerly schedule as many GPU kernels from
co-located tasks as possible. While this design maximizes
GPU utilization, it can cause significant queuing delays for
executing kernels of the high-priority inference tasks. Our
experiments (see Section 5) reveal that the tail latency of a
co-located inference task under MPS can increase up to 20×
compared to their standalone performance.
To effectively share GPU resources while ensuring performance isolation, a GPU sharing system must prioritize
one task over another and rapidly switch between them according to their dynamic resource demands. The speed of
context-switching between tasks, which we denote as the
turnaround latency, is dictated by the scheduling granularity
employed by the GPU sharing system. As described in Section 2, the scheduling granularity used by prior works primarily fall into four categories, from coarsest to finest: iterationlevel (e.g. Salus [71]), kernel-level (e.g., TGS [68]), blocklevel (e.g. EffiSha [14]), and thread-level (e.g. REEF [28]). To
illustrate the effect of scheduling granularity on the tail latency, we present a representative study in Table 1 where
a latency-critical BERT [22] inference task is co-executed
with a Whisper [51] model training workload on an NVIDIA
A100 GPU [45]. In this experiment, we empirically estimate
the turnaround latency for different scheduling granularities on the Whisper model and compare it to the response
time of BERT inference. Since a BERT inference request
takes only 3.93 ms, achieving strong performance isolation
requires turnaround latencies to be in the sub-millisecond
range. However, both iteration-level and kernel-level scheduling can only achieve turnaround latencies of 3 s and 10 ms,
respectively. As a result, scheduling the Whisper training
task at these granularities can introduce 2.5 − 760× higher
overhead on BERT’s inference latency. In contrast, blocklevel and thread-level scheduling achieve microsecond-scale
turnaround latencies of 304 µs and 38 µs, respectively, resulting in only mere 1 − 7% overhead on the latency.

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

From these results, we conclude that to achieve practical
performance isolation guarantees, GPU sharing solutions
must schedule resources at either the block-level or threadlevel granularity. Unfortunately, existing solutions either
do not meet these criteria (e.g., Salus [71], AntMan [70],
TGS [68]) or prove ineffective in diverse production DL clusters due to their intrusive nature (e.g., EffiSha [14], Orion [58])
or lack of generalizability (e.g. REEF [28]). This brings us to
the third limitation.
Reliance on narrowly applicable workload characteristics. Many state-of-the-art GPU sharing systems rely on
specific workload characteristics in their scheduling strategies. For instance, AntMan and TGS provide runtime-level
GPU sharing support but are limited to training workloads
with predictable GPU kernel execution patterns. REEF, on
the other hand, offers strong performance isolation for inference workloads; however, it requires all GPU kernels to be
idempotent to support thread-level kernel scheduling strategies, meaning the kernels must always produce the same
output for a given input, regardless of how many times it is
executed. While these systems demonstrate benefits for certain classes of applications, their underlying assumptions are
often not applicable to large-scale multi-tenant DL clusters
that must support a diverse range of workloads with varying characteristics. More critically, prior studies [67] have
revealed that DL clusters are often agnostic to the specific
semantics of running workloads and extracting applicationlevel context is largely infeasible. As a result, GPU sharing
solutions that depend on specific task characteristics are not
viable in many DL clusters.
In summary, we argue that a practical GPU sharing solution for large-scale DL clusters must address all three of the
aforementioned limitations.

4

TALLY: SYSTEM DESIGN

To facilitate the practical deployment of GPU sharing in production DL clusters, we propose Tally, a novel non-intrusive
GPU sharing system that provides robust performance isolation for high-priority tasks during shared execution with
best-effort tasks across a diverse range of DL workloads.
Tally is designed as a virtualization layer that operates transparently between applications and the GPU, intercepting
device API calls and employing a task-agnostic scheduling
algorithm to prioritize execution from high-priority tasks
while opportunistically scheduling kernels from best-effort
tasks during GPU idle cycles.
Tally ensures performance isolation for high-priority tasks
by scheduling kernels from best-effort tasks at the blocklevel granularity using two scheduling primitives: slicing
and preemption. Slicing divides a large kernel into numerous smaller segments, enabling more controlled scheduling,
whereas preemption allows for the interruption of active
kernels to expedite resource reallocation. Importantly, we

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Tally Client Interception

High-priority
Inference

Best-effort
Training

Best-effort
Inference

Tally Virtualization Server
Kernel
Transformer

Low-level
Device Code

Sliced &
Preemptive Kernel

Transparent
Profiler

Kernel Ptr &
Grid Size

Estimated
Turnaround Latency

Priority-aware
Scheduler

Client Task
Queues

Kernel to dispatch &
Launch Configuration

GPU

Figure 2. Tally architecture.
make two key observations that allow applying these two
scheduling primitives in a task-agnostic and non-intrusive
manner. Firstly, unlike thread-level scheduling, thread blocks
within a GPU are guaranteed to operate independently, making block-level scheduling universally applicable across GPU
kernels. Moreover, while thread-level scheduling can provide stronger performance isolation, we find that block-level
scheduling is sufficient for most practical scenarios. Secondly,
the slicing and preemption scheduling primitives can be applied on GPU kernels through a series of transformation
passes on the kernel device code (PTX code in the case of
NVIDIA GPUs) obtained through the interception of device
API calls. Leveraging these insights, we integrate the slicing
and preemption primitives to Tally’s scheduling algorithm to
enable microsecond-scale turnaround latency, allowing Tally
to promptly switch execution between high-priority and
best-effort tasks and maintain the millisecond-scale latency
requirements in many latency-critical tasks.
Figure 2 shows the high-level design of Tally, which follows a client-server architecture. On the application side,
Tally’s client library intercepts device code and API calls
initiated by client processes and forwards them to the Tally
server, which is responsible for managing the actual device
execution and resource scheduling. The objective of the Tally
server is to facilitate priority-enforced concurrent execution
of one high-priority task alongside multiple best-effort tasks.
To achieve this, the Tally server incorporates three key components: a (1) kernel transformer, which leverages intercepted
device code to convert kernels into slicing and preemptivestyle kernels, a (2) transparent profiler, which profiles the performance of the transformed kernels under various launch
configurations at runtime and estimates their turnaround
latencies, and finally a (3) priority-aware scheduler, which
integrates capabilities of the aforementioned modules and

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Sub-kernel 2

Sub-kernel 1
Block Offset: 0
0

slicing

Original Kernel

1

1

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

2

14

3

2

3

0

1

1

2

3

Sub-kernel 4

Sub-kernel 3

0

Original Kernel:

Transformed Kernel:

…

…

$BB1:

$BB1:
mov.pred %is_sync, 1;
mov.u32 %pos, 0;
br $BB_SYNC;
$BB1_RESUME:

Block Offset: 4

bar.sync 0;

Block Offset: 12

Block Offset: 8
0

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

2

3

0

1

2

3

…
Preemptive Kernel

15

Worker 1

preemption

Worker 2
Next block: 10

In Queue Preempt Flag:
False

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Pointers passed in by scheduler

transform for every
sync instruction

$BB2:
ret;
transform for every
return instruction
postpended for
every kernel

…
$BB2:
mov.pred % is_sync, 0;
mov.u32 %pos, 1;
br $BB_SYNC;
$BB_SYNC:
tally_ts: .branchtargets
$BB1_RESUME, $BB_SYNC;
bar.or.pred %has_sync, 0, %is_sync;
@%has_sync %pos, tally_ts;
ret;

Indicate syncing.
Mark position index as 0.
Branch to unified sync block.
Mark sync resume point.

Indicate returning.
Mark position index as 1.
Branch to unified sync
block.

Check whether there is any
sync call:
1. If there is a sync call, put
threads back to where
they were based on set
position index.
2. Otherwise, all threads
return.

Figure 3. Kernel transformations: (a) slicing and preemption transformations (b) unified synchronization transformation.
strategically schedules GPU execution in a priority-enforced
manner. In the following sections, we provide details regarding each of these components.
4.1

Kernel Transformations

We first illustrate how Tally supports the slicing and preemption primitives through a series of transformation passes on
the kernel device code.
Slicing transformation. Slicing is a technique that facilitates fine-grained control over kernel execution by partitioning the thread blocks of a kernel into multiple sub-kernels.
Figure 3(a) illustrates this concept, where a kernel originally
composed of 16 thread blocks is divided into 4 sub-kernels,
each containing 4 blocks. As thread blocks within a kernel
are guaranteed to be independent, theoretically, this partitioning should preserve the original kernel’s functional
semantics. However, naively launching the original kernel 4
times with 4 thread blocks each will yield incorrect results,
as GPU threads rely on built-in variables such as blockIdx to
determine their task assignment. Specifically, the blockIdx
variable informs a thread of the index of the block it resides
in within the kernel execution, allowing it to properly compute its assigned task index. In the original kernel, threads
are exposed to blockIdx values ranging from 0 to 15 (as 16
blocks in total are launched). Yet, when each sub-kernel is
launched, the threads are exposed to blockIdx values ranging
from 0 to 3, causing all sub-kernels to execute the first 4
blocks of the kernel, which will lead to erroneous results. To
address this issue, we modify a kernel’s device code to take in
an additional offset variable in its parameters and substitute
occurrences of blockIdx with the sum of the offset and the
original blockIdx. This approach enables threads within a
sub-kernel to identify their corresponding subset of blocks.
For instance, sub-kernel 2 can reconstruct its corresponding
block indices from 4 to 7 by adding a block offset of 4 to the
new blockIdx. With this mechanism, the collective work done

by the sub-kernels can properly resemble the original kernel
execution, while offering the scheduler flexible scheduling
at the block-level granularity.
Preemption transformation. Tally introduces a transformation that makes kernels preemptible while preserving
their functional semantics. The preemption transformation
in Tally is inspired by the Persistent Thread Block (PTB)
programming paradigm [27], which deviates from the traditional programming model where the number of thread
blocks launched by a kernel is proportional to the amount of
work it performs. Instead, the PTB model employs a flexible
number of worker blocks to perform all the work. As an example, in Figure 3(a), rather than launching 16 thread blocks
of the original kernel, the PTB model launches 2 worker
blocks to process the 16 blocks in an iterative and dynamic
manner. These workers continuously fetch and increment a
global counter which represents the next task index. Similar
to how sub-kernels in slicing utilize block offsets to recompute their block indices from the original kernel execution,
workers in PTB use the task index to reconstruct the corresponding block indices for the current iteration. For example,
in the illustrated case where thread blocks are structured
in a 1-dimensional grid, a fetched task index of 8 indicates
that the worker should perform the execution of the thread
block with blockIdx 8. In the case of higher-dimensional grids,
block indices can be computed from the integer task index
by referring to the original kernel’s grid dimension.
A critical observation from the PTB model is that the
progress of the kernel execution is effectively encapsulated
in the global task index. Since the execution is now transformed into an iterative approach, kernels can potentially
terminate early and later be resumed from the point at which
they ended, using the task index. This can be achieved by introducing an additional boolean variable to the PTB kernels
as a flag for signaling preemption. At the start of each iteration, workers check this flag to detect preemption signals,

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

thereby enabling block-level preemption within kernels. In
Tally, we automatically convert kernels into this preemptive style by wrapping the original kernel function in the
device code with an outer loop using control flow logic. For
instance, all return statements are transformed into branch
instructions that direct the execution flow to the start of the
iteration. This ensures that each worker block will continue
execution until all tasks are processed or a preemption signal
is received. Furthermore, a synchronization call is introduced
at the end of each iteration to make sure that threads within
a worker block process a single block at a time, preventing potential race conditions and maintaining correctness of
computation.
Unified synchronization transformation. In the preemption transformation, return statements are substituted with
branching statements that redirect threads to synchronize
at the start of the iteration. However, this modification introduces a risk of threads within the same block calling
synchronization at different places within the kernel. For instance, while some threads may arrive at one of the kernel’s
original synchronization points, others may be redirected to
the newly introduced synchronization point due to early returning. Such divergence in synchronization is an undefined
behavior in the GPU programming model and, in practice,
results in infinite kernel stalls. This issue makes the preemption transformation unsafe to be applied on all kernels.
To address this problem, Tally introduces a prepositional
kernel transformation pass which we denote as the unified
synchronization transformation. The algorithm for this transformation is depicted in Figure 3(b). As illustrated, this transformation modifies all synchronization and return instructions by redirecting them to a unified synchronization point
that checks whether all threads have reached a return state.
If this condition is met, all threads return simultaneously;
otherwise, threads from synchronization points loop back to
their previous execution positions, while those returning are
held until all threads align. This modification guarantees that
threads within a block return synchronously. Thus, when
the kernel undergoes the preemption transformation, the
risk of divergence in thread block synchronization due to
early returns is eliminated, thus resolving the issue of infinite stalls. Through this prepositional transformation stage,
the preemptive transformation can be applied automatically
and safely to all kernels.
4.2

Priority-aware Scheduling

We now demonstrate how Tally’s priority-aware scheduler
leverages the aforementioned slicing and preemption primitives alongside the transparent profiler to enforce priority
during the scheduling of concurrent workloads. The algorithm of the scheduler, as outlined in Figure 4, follows an
opportunistic strategy: it prioritizes the immediate dispatch
of high-priority kernels upon their arrival (lines 14 to 20)
and schedules low-priority kernels to execute only when the

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

def launch_and_profile(kernel):
candidates = get_candidate_configs(kernel)
3
for cfg in candidates:
4
est_turnaround = lookup_measurement(kernel, cfg)
5
if est_turnaround is None:
6
est_turnaround = profile(kernel, cfg)
7
if has_launched():
8
return
9
set_launch_config(kernel, candidates,
10
bound=TUNEAROUND_LATENCY_BOUND)
11 def scheduler():
12
while True:
13
for client in sort_by_priority(clients):
14
if client.is_high_priority():
15
kernel = client.fetch_next_kernel()
16
if kernel is not None:
17
preempt_best_effort_kernel()
18
kernel.launch(Config::DEFAULT)
19
if client.has_kernel_running():
20
break
21
else:
22
kernel = client.get_curr_ex_kernel()
23
if kernel is None:
24
kernel = client.fetch_next_kernel()
25
cfg = lookup_launch_config(kernel)
26
if cfg is not None:
27
kernel.launch(cfg)
28
else:
29
launch_and_profile(kernel)
30
elif kernel.running():
31
pass
32
elif kernel.stopped():
33
kernel.resume()
1
2

1

Figure 4. Tally’s priority-aware scheduling algorithm.

high-priority job becomes inactive (lines 21 to 33). Due to
the reactive nature of this algorithm, incoming high-priority
kernels may need to wait for the completion of currently
executing low-priority kernels, potentially introducing delays to the execution of high-priority tasks. To mitigate such
queuing delays, each best-effort kernel is either launched as
multiple sub-kernels one at a time, or in its preemptive form,
such that it can be preempted in the event of a high-priority
kernel arriving during its execution.
The primary challenge of this strategy lies in determining
the appropriate launch configuration for each best-effort
kernel, which includes deciding whether to employ slicing
or preemption and setting the corresponding parameters
for each method. First, due to the inherent difference in
their implementation, each of the two primitives exhibits distinct performance trade-offs. While slicing is a lightweight
transformation, it can incur overhead due to multiple kernel
launches. Conversely, the preemption kernel requires only a
single launch, but the additional synchronization and control
flow can introduce noticeable overhead to certain kernels.
As a result, their relative performance across different kernels varies considerably, posing challenges for the scheduler

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

in choosing between the two. Moreover, for each primitive,
the scheduler need to determine the corresponding parameter, which includes the number of slices for slicing and the
number of workers for preemption. These decisions are crucial as they significantly affect the performance behavior of
the concurrent workloads. For instance, in the context of
preemptive scheduling, allocating fewer workers can expedite the preemption process but can potentially slow down
the execution of best-effort tasks, thereby diminishing the
overall benefits of GPU sharing.
To strike a balance between ensuring robust performance
isolation for high-priority tasks and maintaining acceptable
throughput for low-priority tasks, Tally’s priority-aware
scheduler employs a profile-guided resource provisioning
policy. This policy leverages runtime performance metrics
to determine the optimal launch configuration for each besteffort kernel through a search process. As depicted in Figure 4, lines 2 to 10, for each kernel, the scheduler generates
a set of candidate configurations encompassing both slicing
and preemption. For preemption, potential configurations
are derived by considering all possible multiples of the number of SMs that fit with the thread constraints. Whereas
slicing may set the degree of slicing based on having each
slice operating on different percentages of the total blocks.
These candidate configurations are then assessed by Tally’s
transparent profiler.
To evaluate the performance of candidate configurations,
Tally employs the turnaround latency metric, as introduced in
Section 3. This metric represents the estimated time needed
for a best-effort kernel to release occupied resources. Calculating the turnaround latency for a sliced kernel is relatively
straightforward, which can be done by simply measuring
the completion time of a single kernel slice. In contrast, determining the turnaround latency for preemptive kernels is
more challenging due to their use of dynamic worker blocks.
To address this challenge, we employ a heuristic approach
that approximates the turnaround latency by dividing the
total execution time of the kernel by the number of blocks
allocated to each worker, as expressed by:
kernel_latency · worker_blocks
turnaround_latency =
. (1)
total_blocks
This formula approximates the latency of waiting for each
worker to complete the current block of execution. After
profiling each configuration, the scheduler selects the one
that achieves the optimal performance while complying with
a predefined turnaround latency threshold, which serves as
a configurable parameter to balance the performance tradeoffs between high and low-priority workloads. Empirically,
we find that a default value of 0.0316 ms can effectively
render robust performance isolation while producing competitive system throughput (details in Section 5.6).
Notably, Tally’s profiling process accounts for variations
in kernel inputs by profiling each unique work configuration

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

(block and grid dimensions) separately for every kernel. For
measurement stability, profiling results are averaged across
many runs (e.g., 10). Since profiling operates on a per-kernel
basis, once measurements for a kernel are collected, they
can be reused throughout the execution, thus introducing
negligible overhead to overall execution.
4.3

Non-intrusive Virtualization Layer

Finally, we present details on the implementation of Tally’s
virtualization layer. On the application-side, Tally utilizes
the LD_PRELOAD mechanism in Linux to intercept device API
calls, redirecting them to a surrogate function that mirrors
the API’s original signature. These intercepted API calls are
sent to the server, which handles the actual device execution.
The challenge in this process is enabling the server, which
operates in a separate address space, to execute client kernel functions. The solution leverages a critical insight: GPU
applications register device code with the GPU driver at the
start of execution. By intercepting this process, the server
gains access to the device code, including kernel binaries and
PTX code, which we use at the server-side to apply kernel
transformations and recompile to executable GPU kernels.
A notable concern with this interception and forwarding
approach is the potential communication overhead, which
could impact application performance. To mitigate this, we
have implemented two critical optimizations. First, we utilize
efficient shared memory channels for client-server communication, which significantly reduces the overhead by avoiding
context switches during message passing. Second, we observe that the need to forward many frequent device API
calls, such as cudaGetDevice in NVIDIA, can be avoided by
maintaining local states of the execution context on the client
side. This approach effectively minimizes the frequency of
API call forwarding between the client and server, further reducing the communication overhead. These strategies collectively enable Tally to operate transparently with near-native
performance across all the concurrent DL tasks.

5

EVALUATION

5.1

Methodology

Workloads. To evaluate Tally, we prepare a benchmark
suite consisting of six training and six inference workloads
as listed in Table 2, covering a diverse range of widely used
DL model architectures, including CNNs (e.g., ResNet50 [29]),
transformer-based LLMs (e.g., Llama-2 [62]), and diffusion
models (e.g., Stable Diffusion [54]). Training workloads are
implemented using PyTorch [49], a broadly adopted DL
framework in the research community. For inference workloads, we use high-performance inference engines such as
ONNX Runtime [21], TorchInductor [5], and Hidet [23]. Some
kernels in the workloads are sourced from proprietary libraries such as cuBLAS [43], which restrict device code
interception. To enable block-level transformations, Tally

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

automatically replaces these kernels at runtime with CUTLASS [32] alternatives that offer similar performance. Inspired by prior DL serving benchmarks [8, 28, 38], we simulate inference workloads using the Microsoft Azure Function
Trace 2021 (MAF2) [77], a dataset of Azure serverless function invocations that has been extensively repurposed for DL
serving research. We extract the trace of the most frequently
invoked function and adapt it to match specific traffic loads
based on the inference latency of the models. We define load
as the percentage of time an inference service is actively
serving requests.
Metrics. We use the 99𝑡ℎ percentile latency as the primary
metric for assessing the performance of inference tasks. For
both training and inference tasks, we measure their throughput, defined as the number of samples processed per unit of
time. To evaluate the overall performance of concurrent task
execution, we calculate system throughput by summing the
normalized throughput of all concurrent workloads.
Baselines. We compare the performance of Tally against
four state-of-the-art non-intrusive GPU sharing solutions:
(i) Time-Slicing, (ii) MPS, (iii) MPS-Priority, and (iv) TGS. All
these systems perform scheduling at the kernel-level granularity. Specifically, Time-Slicing and MPS are the proprietary
concurrency mechanisms provided by NVIDIA GPUs. MPSPriority refers to MPS with the client priority control feature
enabled, which allows assigning priority values to workloads
for prioritized resource allocation. TGS is a GPU sharing system specifically designed for DL workloads that leverages
adaptive rate control mechanisms to achieve performance
isolation across concurrent workloads.
Experimental setup. All experiments are conducted on an
AWS EC2 p4d.24xlarge instance, a production-grade GPU
server widely deployed in DL clusters. It is equipped with a
96-core Intel Xeon Platinum 8275CL CPU, 1152 GB of DRAM,
and 8 NVIDIA A100 SXM GPUs, each with 40 GB of memory.
The server runs on Ubuntu 20.04, and is configured with
CUDA 12.2, PyTorch 2.2.0, ONNX Runtime GPU 1.17.0, and
Hidet 0.3.0.
5.2

End-to-end Results

We first analyze Tally’s end-to-end performance in efficiently
sharing GPU resources among multiple workloads while
guaranteeing performance isolation for high-priority inference tasks. To this end, we measure the 99𝑡ℎ -percentile latencies of the inference tasks and the overall system throughput
achieved by Tally when executed concurrently with a besteffort training workload. First, we compare the latency metrics against the state-of-the-art non-intrusive GPU sharing
systems, namely Time-Slicing, MPS, MPS-Priority, and TGS,
as well as against the ideal scenario of running the inference
task in isolation. Figure 5 presents the latency and throughput measurements for all inference-training combinations
from the benchmark suite, with inference tasks simulated

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Training Model

Dataset

# Params

Throughput

ResNet50 [29]
PointNet [50]
BERT [22]

ImageNet [20]
ShapeNet [12]
SQuAD [53]

25.6M
3.5M
110M

1.0 it/s
40.0 it/s
1.8 it/s

GPT2-Large [52]
PEGASUS [75]
Whisper-v3 [51]

Wikitext2 [39]
XSum [40]
LibriSpeech [48]

774M
568M
1.5B

3.3 it/s
2.9 it/s
0.3 it/s

Inference Model

Engine

# Params

Latency

ResNet50 [29]

Hidet [23]

25.6M

1.37 ms

BERT [22]
YOLOv6m [37]
Llama-2-7b [62]
Stable Diffusion [54]
GPT-Neo [9]

ONNX RT [21]
TorchInductor [5]
ONNX RT [21]
TorchInductor [5]
TorchInductor [5]

110M
34.9M
7B
983M
2.7B

3.93 ms
17.5 ms
1.9 s
2.5 s
3.6 s

Table 2. Training and inference benchmarks

using the MAF2 trace with a fixed 50% load. The results
demonstrate that Time-Slicing, MPS, MPS-Priority, and TGS
exhibit significantly higher overhead compared to the ideal
latency, with an average increase of 252.3%, 345.0%, 195.5%,
and 188.9%, respectively. The suboptimal inference latencies
exhibited by Time-Slicing and MPS can be attributed to their
priority-agnostic design, which focuses solely on maximizing
system utilization. MPS-Priority and TGS, on the other hand,
exhibit improved latencies by prioritizing kernel execution
of high-priority tasks over best-effort tasks. However, their
coarse-grained kernel-level scheduling strategies fail to effectively mitigate co-execution interference. In stark contrast,
Tally consistently maintains tail latencies nearly identical
to the ideal latencies of the high-priority workloads, with
an average percentage increase of mere 7.2%. This stronger
performance isolation capability can be attributed to the
block-level scheduling strategy that Tally employs.
In addition to latency, we also compare the overall system throughput of Tally against the baseline GPU sharing
systems. Tally demonstrates competitive performance relative to the baselines, attaining an average of 105.2%, 83.6%,
80.6%, and 80.3% of the system throughput achieved by the
four baseline systems, respectively. This shows the ability of
Tally’s priority-aware scheduler to opportunistically schedule best-effort kernels while preserving latency requirements
of high-priority tasks in shared execution environments.
Furthermore, we observe that MPS, MPS-Priority, and TGS
exhibit substantial variation in performance degradation
for high-priority inference tasks across different workload
combinations. For instance, TGS experiences performance
degradation ranging from 15.6% to 751.7%. This variation in
latency reveals the sensitivity of these systems to workload
characteristics, such as the differences in kernel duration
across various tasks. As these systems schedule at the kernel

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Ideal

Time-Slicing

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

MPS

System Throughput P99 Latency (ms)

System Throughput P99 Latency (ms)

BERT

20
0

150
100
50
0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

0
40000

0

GPT-Neo-2.7B

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Stable Diffusion

7500
5000
2500
0

0
2
1
0

ResNet50

10

20000

per t50 et sus T2 RT
Whis ResNe PointNPega GP BE

Tally

20

1
YOLOv6M

TGS

Llama-2-7B
6000
4000
2000
0
2

40

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

MPS-Priority

per t50 et sus T2 RT
Whis ResNe PointNPega GP BE

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

per t50 et sus T2 RT
Whis ResNe PointNPega GP BE

Figure 5. Analysis of 99th-percentile latency and system throughput across different high-priority inference and best-effort
training workload combinations under various GPU sharing mechanisms.
level, their performance deteriorates more severely for workloads with longer kernels. In contrast, Tally’s block-level
scheduling demonstrates robust performance against variations in kernel duration, effectively limiting the performance
degradation of inference tasks to under 10% across 70% of
the workload combinations (worst-case 23% on ResNet50).
5.3

Traffic Load Sensitivity Analysis

We next evaluate the sensitivity of Tally’s performance isolation capabilities to varying traffic loads. For this experiment, we use BERT and Llama-2-7B as the inference tasks
representative of low-latency (3.93 ms) and long-latency
(1.9 s) workloads. Each of them is paired with three distinct
training workloads: BERT, GPT2, and Whisper, chosen for
their observed tendency to cause significant interference.
Figure 6a (1) and (2) present a comparative analysis of the
99𝑡ℎ -percentile latency for the inference tasks under Tally
and TGS relative to the original latency as a function of GPU
idle time (calculated as 100% - load) ranging from 10% to 90%.
The results demonstrate that both inference tasks under Tally
exhibit latencies indistinguishable from their original performance consistently across varying loads. In contrast, TGS

incurs latency slowdowns of up to 5.8× and 2.3× for BERT
and Llama-2-7B, respectively. These findings demonstrate
the robustness of Tally’s performance isolation capabilities
for high-priority inference tasks, regardless of traffic load or
the characteristics of the paired training workload.
We further analyze the relationship between Tally’s achievable throughput and traffic load. Figure 6a (3) and (4) illustrate the system throughput under Tally and TGS as a function of idle time. Both systems exhibit an upward trend in
system throughput as the percentage of idle time increases,
indicating their ability to leverage available resources for
improved performance. During periods of high traffic load,
there is a noticeable difference between the two systems.
For instance, at 10% idle time, the system throughput under
Tally is 1.19, whereas TGS achieves 1.65. This difference is
attributed to Tally’s strict priority enforcement policy, which
executes best-effort tasks only when the high-priority task
is inactive, sacrificing potential throughput gains for the
preservation of the high-priority task’s latency. In contrast,
TGS achieves higher throughput but at the cost of significant
slowdowns in tail latency, as demonstrated earlier. Nevertheless, as idle time increases, the throughput difference

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

Whisper - TGS
Whisper - Tally

(1) Request Count Over Time

Ideal

(2) Llama-2-7B

BERT

100

4000

20

3000

10

2000

(3)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
10% 30% 50% 70% 90%
Idle Time

Server Capacity

200

(4)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
10% 30% 50% 70% 90%
Idle Time

0
30

(2) High-priority P99 Latency Over Time
Ideal
Time-Slicing
MPS
MPS-Priority
TGS
Tally

20
10

Throughput (it/s)

System Throughput

P99 Latency (ms)

(1)

GPT2 - TGS
GPT2 - Tally

P99 Latency (ms) Request Count

BERT - TGS
BERT - Tally

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

(3) Best-effort Throughput Over Time

1
0 0

2000

4000
6000
Timestamp (s)

Ideal
Tally

8000

Figure 6. (a) Latency and throughput for high-priority BERT and Llama2-7B inference co-located with BERT, GPT-2, and
Whisper training under Tally and TGS across different traffic loads. (b) Time-series visualization of user traffic, tail latency,
and throughput over time for BERT inference co-located with BERT training across different GPU sharing systems.
between Tally and TGS diminishes. This convergence indicates that for scenarios where heavy underutilization is
observed, Tally not only offers reliable performance isolation guarantees but also achieves competitive throughput
compared to other GPU sharing systems.
To illustrate the adaptive nature of Tally to varying traffic
load, in Figure 6b, we plot the real-time traffic trace to a BERT
inference task (a condensed version of the original MAF2
trace), and measure the real-time tail latency and throughput
when co-located with another BERT training task. Figure 6b
illustrates (1) the real-time traffic to a BERT inference task,
(2) 99𝑡ℎ percentile latency of the inference server achieved
by different GPU sharing systems and (3) the throughput of
the co-located best-effort BERT training achieved by Tally
compared to the original throughput of the training task. As
shown in Figure 6b (2), the tail latency under Tally, represented by the purple line, closely aligns with the ideal latency
depicted by the blue line, with negligible deviation throughout the simulation period. Whereas alternative approaches
such as Time-Slicing, MPS, MPS-Priority, and TGS result in
substantial slowdowns in latency as depicted. Additionally,
Figure 6b (3) shows Tally’s ability to opportunistically adjust the throughput of the best-effort task in correspondence
with the fluctuating traffic load to the high-priority inference
task, as discussed in Section 4. As a result, Tally preserves
over 68% of the training task’s original throughput simultaneously running the high-priority inference workload on
the same GPU without affecting its latency requirements.

5.4

Scalability with Number of Workloads

To demonstrate Tally’s ability to support multiple best-effort
workloads while preserving the performance of the co-located
high-priority job, we extend our experiments beyond the
two-job scenario. We designed an experiment with a set of
identical ResNet50 inference workloads, each operating at
a low traffic load of 10% and one of these workloads designated as the high-priority online inference task while the
rest as best-effort offline inference tasks. We measure 99𝑡ℎ percentile latency of the high-priority task and the aggregated system throughput, measured in number of requests
processed per minute, as we scale up the number of besteffort tasks. The results in Figure 7(a), reveal that the latency
of the high-priority task remains consistent throughout the
spectrum of scaling from 1 to 10 workloads. At the same
time, the system throughput exhibits a steady increase as the
number of workloads grows, until the GPU saturates at 8 concurrent best-effort workloads. This shows that Tally can be
particularly useful in scenarios where numerous jobs exhibit
extremely low utilization, as Tally can efficiently pack these
workloads together to maximize system throughput without
compromising the performance of high-priority tasks.
5.5

Performance Decomposition

We analyze the importance of Tally’s priority-aware scheduling algorithm and block-level transformations for performance isolation. Figure 7(b) compares the 99𝑡ℎ -percentile
latency of a high-priority BERT model when co-located with

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

Figure 7. (a) Scalability performance of Tally with respect to number of concurrent workloads. (b) Performance decomposition
of Tally for BERT inference. (c) Latency and throughput under different turnaround latency threshold settings.
training workloads from the benchmark suite. Ideal denotes
the original latency of the task executed in isolation. Noscheduling refers to the indiscriminate dispatching of kernels
from both workloads upon arrival. Scheduling w/o Transformations employs Tally’s priority-aware scheduling without
kernel transformations, while Scheduling with Transformations represents the full implementation of Tally, utilizing
slicing and preemption mechanisms for block-level scheduling. The results reveal that No-scheduling incurs substantial
latency overhead across all 6 job combinations, with the most
severe case exhibiting a 30× slowdown when co-located with
Whisper. This significant performance degradation is attributable to the absence of priority enforcement, resulting in
considerable co-execution interference. The integration of
Tally’s priority-aware kernel-level scheduling strategy somewhat mitigates this overhead. For ResNet50 and GPT2, this
approach yields latencies close to ideal performance, with
8.0% and 9.8% slowdown respectively. However, for workloads such as Whisper and BERT, the latency slowdown can
still reach up to 10×. This difference in slowdown is attributed to the variation in kernel duration distribution. For
instance, 99.3% of kernels in ResNet50 complete in less than
0.1 ms, whereas 5.6% of kernels in Whisper exceed the duration of an entire BERT inference (3.93 ms). These prolonged
kernels significantly delay the execution of high-priority kernels. Notably, with kernel transformation enabled, i.e., with
full Tally, the latency overhead becomes negligible across
all six training workloads, resulting in an average of 4.0%
slowdown (6.2% in the worst case). This shows the necessity
of block-level scheduling in maintaining robust performance
isolation guarantees.
5.6

Turnaround Latency Analysis

We examine the impact of the turnaround latency threshold
(delineated in Section 4) by evaluating the tail latency of the
BERT inference workload and the normalized throughput of
the co-located training job on six models across six distinct
threshold values, ranging from 0.01 ms to 10 ms. The results,
depicted in Figure 7 (c-i) and (c-ii), show that higher turnaround latency thresholds generally correspond to increased

tail latency for the inference workload with only slight increase in the throughput. Based on these empirical results,
we find that a turnaround latency threshold of 0.0316 ms
provides the best balance between latency and throughput,
which is the default setting we use throughout experiments.
5.7

Overhead Analysis

Virtualization. We evaluate Tally’s virtualization overhead
by measuring the throughput of each workload in the benchmark suite and comparing it to their baseline performance.
Results indicate that virtualization incurs an average overhead of only 1%, proving minimal performance impact.
Kernel transformation. We evaluate the overhead of Tally’s
kernel transformation by profiling 10𝐾 kernels from besteffort workloads (including same kernel with varying work
dimensions). Our analysis reveals an average overhead of
25%. Notably, this overhead is exclusive to best-effort kernels.
The performance of high-priority jobs remain unaffected.
Profiling. Tally profiles each new kernel from best-effort
tasks to determine its optimal launch configuration. Once
collected, these measurements are reused throughout the
execution. Thus, Tally’s profiling stage for a job generally
completes within minutes. This overhead is negligible given
that training workloads often run for hours to days.

6

DISCUSSION

Comparison with MIG. NVIDIA MIG [46] enables hardwarelevel GPU partitioning into isolated instances, providing robust performance isolation for concurrent workloads. However, MIG’s coarse-grained partitioning mechanism inherently limits the maximum resource allocatable to individual
workloads, which can result in potential performance degradation of high-priority tasks. This limitation stems from
MIG’s requirement for configuring resource partitions prior
to task execution; any alteration to these partitions necessitates the termination of all running processes, rendering it
impractical in production environments where job interruption is typically prohibited. Even when reconfiguration is
feasible, this process can incur significant overhead: resetting

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

partitions takes several seconds via command-line instructions, and applications require additional time from seconds
to minutes to resume execution. As a result, MIG struggles
to promptly adapt resource allocations to meet the dynamic
demands of DL workloads, potentially leading to compromised performance of high-priority workloads. Additionally,
MIG’s static allocation scheme can result in suboptimal resource utilization, as idle cycles within one partition cannot
be dynamically reallocated to others. These limitations prevent MIG from simultaneously achieving high utilization
while maintaining the performance of high-priority tasks. In
contrast, Tally effectively addresses these challenges by dynamically allocating resources based on real-time resource
demands, allowing high-priority tasks to fully utilize the
GPU when active while reallocating idle cycles to best-effort
tasks, thereby ensuring both high utilization and effective
performance isolation.
Generalization to CUDA extensions. While the standard
GPU programming model enforces the independence of
thread blocks within a kernel (as explained in Section 2),
recent CUDA extensions, such as Thread Block Clusters [16]
and Cooperative Groups [17], introduce support for interblock dependencies under certain constraints. We illustrate
how Tally can reliably detect and handle these cases. (1)
Thread Block Clusters organizes thread blocks into clusters,
enabling intra-cluster communication via hardware support.
These kernels can be identified by special flags passed at kernel launch. In such cases, Tally applies slicing and preemption at the cluster level, rather than at the thread block level.
This ensures execution correctness while enabling more finegrained scheduling. (2) Cooperative Groups introduces new
thread grouping mechanisms that extend the capabilities
of the standard CUDA programming model. Among them
is inter-block synchronization, which enables coordinated
execution across thread blocks. Kernels using this feature
are launched through the cudaLaunchCooperativeKernel API,
making them easily identifiable. Notably, inter-block synchronization requires that all thread blocks within a kernel
must be simultaneously scheduled on the GPU. For these
kernels, Tally refrains from applying block-level scheduling
to ensure compliance with the concurrent execution requirements. In our evaluation, none of the workloads employ
inter-block cooperative groups, suggesting that the absence
of block-level scheduling for these kernels has a negligible
impact on Tally’s overall performance isolation guarantees.

of kernels with complementary resource demands (e.g., compute vs. memory) to exploit resource heterogeneity in GPUs.
Systems like Kernelet [80] and Slate [4] schedule such coexecution dynamically at runtime, while approaches like
Kernel Fusion [64], HFUSE [36], Tacker [79], and ISPA [78]
employ source-to-source transformations to fuse kernels
during the compilation phase. Despite their efficacy in improving resource utilization, these systems inherently lack
support for performance isolation, as they prioritize overall
system efficiency over preservation of performance of individual workloads, making them unsuitable for production
environments where tasks must adhere to strict SLAs.
To address the need for performance isolation, solutions
like Effisha [14] and GPES [81] utilize block-level preemption
techniques to mitigate interference during concurrent execution. However, these approaches require access to the application source code, whereas Tally operates non-intrusively.
Other solutions, such as AntMan [70] and TGS [68], leverage the iterative nature of DL training to adaptively limit
the resources of low-priority tasks based on performance
feedback from high-priority jobs. Meanwhile, REEF [28] implements a reset-based scheduling mechanism that achieves
microsecond-scale kernel preemption latency on idempotent kernels. Yet, these works rely on specific task characteristics and cannot generalize to the wide variety of DL
workloads. In contrast, Tally supports broad compatibility
using task-agnostic scheduling and kernel transformations.
Furthermore, Orion [58] enhances performance isolation via
kernel-level scheduling with consideration on each kernel’s
compute and memory requirements. However, it requires
offline profiling of workloads, which is challenging to accomplish in cluster settings. In comparison, Tally employs
transparent profiling for priority-aware scheduling.

7

We thank the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd, Tim
Rogers, for their valuable feedback. This research was supported in part by the Innovation JELF Grant, NSERC Discovery Grant, AWS Machine Learning Research Award (MLRA),
Facebook Faculty Research Award, Google Scholar Research
Award, and VMware Early Career Faculty Grant.

8

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we highlight the limitations of current GPU
sharing systems and their inability to meet the diverse requirements of modern large-scale DL clusters. To overcome
these challenges, we design Tally, a novel non-intrusive GPU
sharing mechanism that offers robust performance isolation
while maintaining compatibility with a wide range of DL
workloads. Our evaluation shows that Tally can effectively
ensure the performance standards of latency-critical tasks
during shared execution, incurring a mere 7.2% overhead on
average while offering competitive system throughput.

Acknowledgments
RELATED WORK

Many GPU sharing systems have been proposed with the
goal of maximizing throughput. NVIDIA’s Time-Slicing [25]
and MPS [1], for example, offer mechanisms to share GPU resources in temporal and spatial manners, respectively. Moreover, several studies [19, 61, 66] have explored co-execution

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

A

Artifact Appendix

A.1

Abstract

We provide the source code of Tally along with scripts to
reproduce experimental results presented in the evaluation
section. This appendix includes instructions for generating
plots similar to Figure 5 and Figure 7(b). Dockerfiles are
provided to set up the required runtime environment. To
expedite artifact evaluation, a pre-built image is available,
containing the fully configured environment, pre-compiled
deep learning models, and datasets as specified in Table 2.
The experiments require an x86-64 Linux host with at least
85 GB RAM, 200 GB of free disk space, and an NVIDIA A100
GPU (40 GB). For consistent performance, we recommend
using a Google Cloud a2-highgpu-1g instance.
A.2

A.3.5 Models. The models used in these experiments are
listed in Table 2.
A.4 Installation
1. Clone the Github repository.
$ git clone
https://github.com/tally-project/tally-bench.git
$ cd tally-bench

2. Pull the Docker image.
$ docker pull wzhao18/tally:bench

A.5 Experiment workflow
1. Create the results directory and launch the Docker
container.
$ mkdir tally_results
$ docker run -it --shm-size=64g --gpus 0 -v
${PWD}/tally_results:/home/tally-bench/tally_results
wzhao18/tally:bench /bin/bash

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Run-time environment: Docker.
• Compilation: Pre-compiled within a Docker image.
• Data set: MAF2 trace and datasets as listed in Table 2.
• Hardware: A 12-core CPU with 85 GB RAM and an NVIDIA
A100 GPU (40 GB).
• Metrics: 99𝑡ℎ percentile latency and throughput.
• Experiments: End-to-end evaluation (Section 5.2) and performance decomposition (Section 5.5). For faster evaluation,
the default setup generates results only for co-executing
BERT and Llama inference tasks alongside all training workloads. Instructions for running the full set of inference workloads can be found in Section A.7.
• Output: Plots similar to Figure 5 and Figure 7(b).
• How much disk space required (approximately)?: Approximately 200 GB.
• How much time is needed to prepare workflow (approximately)?: About 10 minutes to download the Docker
image.
• How much time is needed to complete experiments
(approximately)?: Approximately 6 hours for BERT and
Llama tasks; 18 hours for the full end-to-end evaluation.
• Publicly available?: Yes.
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: MIT License.

A.3

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko

Description

A.3.1 How to access. The artifact is available for download on GitHub: https://github.com/tally-project/tally-bench.
A.3.2 Hardware dependencies. Requires an x86-64 Linux
host with at least 85 GB of RAM, 200 GB of free disk space,
and an NVIDIA A100 GPU (40 GB). We recommend a Google
Cloud a2-highgpu-1g instance for consistent performance.
A.3.3 Software dependencies. Docker installation is required as all experiments are configured to run within the
provided Docker image.
A.3.4 Data sets. The data sets used in the experiments
are listed in Table 2 and are pre-downloaded as part of the
Docker image.

2. Run the following commands to run the experiments.
(On host machine)
$ sudo nvidia-smi -i 0 -c DEFAULT
(In docker container)
$ ./scripts/run_bench.sh > tally_results/b1.log 2>&1
(On host machine)
$ sudo nvidia-smi -i 0 -c EXCLUSIVE_PROCESS
(In docker container)
$ ./scripts/run_bench.sh > tally_results/b2.log 2>&1

A.6 Evaluation and expected results
1. Parse results into CSV files.
(On host or in container)
$ python3 ./scripts/parse_results.py

2. Generate plots.
(On host or in container)
$ python3 ./scripts/plot_results_micro.py

3. Plots similar to Figure 5 and Figure 7(b) can be found
in the tally_results directory.
A.7

Experiment customization

To run the full benchmark, pass the --run-full-benchmark
flag to run_bench.sh. Use the scripts/plot_results.py
script to generate the plots. Additional scripts for running
other experiments and producing figures included in the
paper are available in the scripts directory.

References
[1] Multi-process service. Available online, 2024. https://docs.nvidia.com/
deploy/mps/.
[2] Martin Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis,
Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving,
Michael Isard, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek G. Murray, Benoit Steiner, Paul Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan,
Pete Warden, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
16), pages 265–283, 2016.
[3] Taleb Alashkar, Songyao Jiang, Shuyang Wang, and Yun Fu. Examplesrules guided deep neural network for makeup recommendation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 31,
2017.
[4] Tyler Allen, Xizhou Feng, and Rong Ge. Slate: Enabling workloadaware efficient multiprocessing for modern gpgpus. In 2019 IEEE
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS),
pages 252–261, 2019.
[5] Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh
Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni
Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will Constable, Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael
Gschwind, Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael Lazos, Mario Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang,
Yinghai Lu, C. K. Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan, Christian Puhrsch,
Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk,
Shunting Zhang, Michael Suo, Phil Tillet, Xu Zhao, Eikan Wang, Keren
Zhou, Richard Zou, Xiaodong Wang, Ajit Mathews, William Wen, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch 2: Faster
machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation
and graph compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS ’24, page 929–947, New York,
NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
[6] Andrew Audibert, Yang Chen, Dan Graur, Ana Klimovic, Jiří Šimša, and
Chandramohan A. Thekkath. tf.data service: A case for disaggregating
ml input data processing. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium
on Cloud Computing, SoCC ’23, page 358–375, New York, NY, USA,
2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[7] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural
machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. In
Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9,
2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
[8] Anirban Bhattacharjee, Ajay Dev Chhokra, Zhuangwei Kang,
Hongyang Sun, Aniruddha Gokhale, and Gabor Karsai. Barista: Efficient and scalable serverless serving system for deep learning prediction services. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), pages 23–33. IEEE, 2019.
[9] Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman.
GPT-Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with MeshTensorflow, March 2021. If you use this software, please cite it using
these metadata.
[10] James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson,
Chris Leary, Dougal Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake
VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
[11] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[12] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan,
Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song,
Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[13] Chao Chen, Chris Porter, and Santosh Pande. Case: a compiler-assisted
scheduling framework for multi-gpu systems. In Proceedings of the
27th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP ’22, page 17–31, New York, NY, USA, 2022.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[14] Guoyang Chen, Yue Zhao, Xipeng Shen, and Huiyang Zhou. Effisha:
A software framework for enabling effficient preemptive scheduling
of gpu. SIGPLAN Not., 52(8):3–16, jan 2017.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[15] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Benenson,
U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
urban scene understanding. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 3213–3223, Los Alamitos,
CA, USA, jun 2016. IEEE Computer Society.
[16] NVIDIA Corporation. CUDA C++ Programming Guide. NVIDIA Corporation, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-26.
[17] NVIDIA Corporation. CUDA C++ Programming Guide. NVIDIA Corporation, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-26.
[18] Daniel Crankshaw, Xin Wang, Guilio Zhou, Michael J. Franklin,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Clipper: A Low-Latency online
prediction serving system. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17), pages 613–627, Boston,
MA, March 2017. USENIX Association.
[19] Weihao Cui, Mengze Wei, Quan Chen, Xiaoxin Tang, Jingwen Leng,
Li Li, and Mingyi Guo. Ebird: Elastic batch for improving responsiveness and throughput of deep learning services. In 2019 IEEE 37th
International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), pages 497–505,
2019.
[20] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei.
Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 248–255,
2009.
[21] ONNX Runtime developers. Onnx runtime. https://onnxruntime.ai/,
2021. Version: x.y.z.
[22] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio,
editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[23] Yaoyao Ding, Cody Hao Yu, Bojian Zheng, Yizhi Liu, Yida Wang, and
Gennady Pekhimenko. Hidet: Task-mapping programming paradigm
for deep learning tensor programs. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS 2023, page 370–384,
New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[24] Doug Eadline. Nvidia h100: Are 550,000 gpus enough for this year?,
Aug 2023.
[25] Guin Gilman and Robert J. Walls. Characterizing concurrency mechanisms for nvidia gpus under deep learning workloads. Performance
Evaluation, 151:102234, 2021.
[26] Inc. Google. Kubernetes: Production-grade container orchestration.
https://kubernetes.io, 2014. Accessed: 2024-06-24.
[27] Kshitij Gupta, Jeff A. Stuart, and John D. Owens. A study of persistent threads style gpu programming for gpgpu workloads. In 2012
Innovative Parallel Computing (InPar), pages 1–14, 2012.
[28] Mingcong Han, Hanze Zhang, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen.
Microsecond-scale preemption for concurrent GPU-accelerated DNN
inferences. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 22), pages 539–558, Carlsbad, CA, July 2022.
USENIX Association.
[29] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 770–778, 2016.
[30] Qinghao Hu, Peng Sun, Shengen Yan, Yonggang Wen, and Tianwei
Zhang. Characterization and prediction of deep learning workloads
in large-scale gpu datacenters. In Proceedings of the International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, pages 1–15, 2021.
[31] Qinghao Hu, Meng Zhang, Peng Sun, Yonggang Wen, and Tianwei
Zhang. Lucid: A non-intrusive, scalable and interpretable scheduler

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
for deep learning training jobs. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS 2023, page 457–472, New
York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[32] Andrew Kerr, Duane Merrill, Julien Demouth, and John Tran. CUTLASS: Fast Linear Algebra in CUDA C++. NVIDIA Corporation, December 2017. Version 2.10.
[33] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira,
C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2012.
[34] Kevin Lee, Kevin Lee, Adi Gangidi, and Mathew Oldham. Building
meta’s genai infrastructure, May 2024.
[35] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Dan
Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault, editors, Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 7871–7880, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[36] Ao Li, Bojian Zheng, Gennady Pekhimenko, and Fan Long. Automatic
horizontal fusion for gpu kernels. In 2022 IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), pages 14–27.
IEEE, 2022.
[37] Chuyi Li, Lulu Li, Hongliang Jiang, Kaiheng Weng, Yifei Geng, Liang
Li, Zaidan Ke, Qingyuan Li, Meng Cheng, Weiqiang Nie, et al. Yolov6:
A single-stage object detection framework for industrial applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02976, 2022.
[38] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng,
Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. AlpaServe: Statistical multiplexing with model
parallelism for deep learning serving. In 17th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23), pages
663–679, Boston, MA, July 2023. USENIX Association.
[39] Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher.
Pointer sentinel mixture models, 2016.
[40] Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the
details, just the summary! Topic-aware convolutional neural networks
for extreme summarization. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium,
2018.
[41] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar
Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. {Heterogeneity-Aware} cluster
scheduling policies for deep learning workloads. In 14th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
20), pages 481–498, 2020.
[42] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar
Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. Heterogeneity-Aware cluster scheduling policies for deep learning workloads. In 14th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20), pages
481–498. USENIX Association, November 2020.
[43] NVIDIA Corporation. Basic Linear Algebra on NVIDIA GPUs, 2024.
Version 12.0.
[44] NVIDIA Corporation. CUDA C++ Programming Guide, version 12.5 edition, June 2024. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programmingguide/.
[45] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU, 2024. Accessed:
2024-12-13.
[46] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU, June 2024. https:
//www.nvidia.com/en-us/technologies/multi-instance-gpu/.
[47] OpenAI. Chatgpt. Available online, 2024. https://chat.openai.com/
chat.

Wei Zhao, Anand Jayarajan, and Gennady Pekhimenko
[48] Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur.
Librispeech: An asr corpus based on public domain audio books. In
2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pages 5206–5210, 2015.
[49] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein,
Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[50] Charles R. Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J. Guibas. Pointnet:
Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.
[51] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine
McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via largescale weak supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.
[52] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei,
Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[53] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang.
SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. In
Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras, editors, Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[54] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser,
and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[55] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and
Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[56] Dharma Shukla, Muthian Sivathanu, Srinidhi Viswanatha, Bhargav
Gulavani, Rimma Nehme, Amey Agrawal, Chen Chen, Nipun Kwatra,
Ramachandran Ramjee, Pankaj Sharma, et al. Singularity: Planet-scale,
preemptive and elastic scheduling of ai workloads. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.07848, 2022.
[57] David Silver, Aja Huang, Christopher J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel,
and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with deep neural
networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–503, 2016.
[58] Foteini Strati, Xianzhe Ma, and Ana Klimovic. Orion: Interferenceaware, fine-grained gpu sharing for ml applications. In Proceedings of
the Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’24,
page 1075–1092, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[59] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. Sequence to sequence
learning with neural networks. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2,
NIPS’14, page 3104–3112, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press.
[60] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed,
Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew
Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In 2015 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 1–9, 2015.
[61] Xiaodan Serina Tan, Pavel Golikov, Nandita Vijaykumar, and Gennady
Pekhimenko. Gpupool: A holistic approach to fine-grained gpu sharing
in the cloud. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Parallel
Architectures and Compilation Techniques, PACT ’22, page 317–332,
New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[62] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal

Tally: Non-Intrusive Performance Isolation for Concurrent Deep Learning Workloads
Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes,
Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami,
Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann,
Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut
Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier
Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie,
Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela
Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert
Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023.
[63] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana
Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio. Graph attention networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[64] Guibin Wang, YiSong Lin, and Wei Yi. Kernel fusion: An effective
method for better power efficiency on multithreaded gpu. pages 344–
350, 2010.
[65] Shang Wang, Peiming Yang, Yuxuan Zheng, Xin Li, and Gennady
Pekhimenko. Horizontally fused training array: An effective hardware utilization squeezer for training novel deep learning models.
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 3:599–623, 2021.
[66] Zhenning Wang, Jun Yang, Rami Melhem, Bruce Childers, Youtao
Zhang, and Minyi Guo. Simultaneous multikernel gpu: Multi-tasking
throughput processors via fine-grained sharing. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
pages 358–369, 2016.
[67] Qizhen Weng, Wencong Xiao, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang, Cheng Wang,
Jian He, Yong Li, Liping Zhang, Wei Lin, and Yu Ding. MLaaS in the
wild: Workload analysis and scheduling in Large-Scale heterogeneous
GPU clusters. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI 22), pages 945–960, Renton, WA, April 2022.
USENIX Association.
[68] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Zhihao Bai, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Transparent GPU sharing in container clouds for deep learning workloads.
In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), pages 69–85, Boston, MA, April 2023. USENIX
Association.
[69] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian
Sivathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han, Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng,
Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang, Fan Yang, and Lidong Zhou. Gandiva:
Introspective cluster scheduling for deep learning. In 13th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
18), pages 595–610, Carlsbad, CA, October 2018. USENIX Association.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[70] Wencong Xiao, Shiru Ren, Yong Li, Yang Zhang, Pengyang Hou, Zhi
Li, Yihui Feng, Wei Lin, and Yangqing Jia. AntMan: Dynamic scaling
on GPU clusters for deep learning. In 14th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20), pages 533–548.
USENIX Association, November 2020.
[71] Peifeng Yu and Mosharaf Chowdhury. Fine-grained gpu sharing primitives for deep learning applications. In I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos,
and V. Sze, editors, Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, volume 2, pages 98–111, 2020.
[72] Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, and Hyunwoo J. Kim. Graph transformer networks. Curran Associates Inc., Red
Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
[73] Ekim Yurtsever, Jacob Lambert, Alexander Carballo, and Kazuya
Takeda. A survey of autonomous driving: Common practices and
emerging technologies. IEEE access, 8:58443–58469, 2020.
[74] Chengliang Zhang, Minchen Yu, Wei Wang, and Feng Yan. MArk:
Exploiting cloud services for Cost-Effective, SLO-Aware machine learning inference serving. In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 19), pages 1049–1062, Renton, WA, July 2019. USENIX
Association.
[75] Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter Liu. Pegasus: Pre-training with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization. In International conference on machine learning, pages
11328–11339. PMLR, 2020.
[76] Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, Aixin Sun, and Yi Tay. Deep learning based
recommender system: A survey and new perspectives. ACM Comput.
Surv., 52(1), feb 2019.
[77] Yanqi Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Gohar Irfan Chaudhry, Rodrigo Fonseca,
Sameh Elnikety, Christina Delimitrou, and Ricardo Bianchini. Faster
and cheaper serverless computing on harvested resources. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, SOSP ’21, page 724–739, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[78] Han Zhao, Weihao Cui, Quan Chen, and Minyi Guo. Ispa: Exploiting
intra-sm parallelism in gpus via fine-grained resource management.
IEEE Trans. Comput., 72(5):1473–1487, may 2023.
[79] Han Zhao, Weihao Cui, Quan Chen, Youtao Zhang, Yanchao Lu, Chao
Li, Jingwen Leng, and Minyi Guo. Tacker: Tensor-cuda core kernel fusion for improving the gpu utilization while ensuring qos. In 2022 IEEE
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), pages 800–813, 2022.
[80] Jianlong Zhong and Bingsheng He. Kernelet: High-throughput gpu
kernel executions with dynamic slicing and scheduling. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 25(6):1522–1532, 2013.
[81] Husheng Zhou, Guangmo Tong, and Cong Liu. Gpes: a preemptive
execution system for gpgpu computing. In 21st IEEE Real-Time and
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium, pages 87–97, 2015.

