Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning
Clusters on Campus
Kaiqiang Xu

Decang Sun

Hao Wang

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
kxuar@cse.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
dsunak@cse.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
hwangdv@connect.ust.hk

Zhenghang Ren

Xinchen Wan

Xudong Liao

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
zrenak@cse.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
xinchen.wan@connect.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
xliaoaf@connect.ust.hk

Zilong Wang

Junxue Zhang

Kai Chen

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
zwangfb@connect.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
jzhangcs@connect.ust.hk

Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
kaichen@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
The rapid advancement of large machine learning (ML) models has driven universities worldwide to invest heavily in
GPU clusters. Effectively sharing these resources among
multiple users is essential for maximizing both utilization
and accessibility. However, managing shared GPU clusters
presents significant challenges, ranging from system configuration to fair resource allocation among users.
This paper introduces SING, a full-stack solution tailored
to simplify shared GPU cluster management. Aimed at addressing the pressing need for efficient resource sharing
with limited staffing, SING enhances operational efficiency
by reducing maintenance costs and optimizing resource utilization. We provide a comprehensive overview of its four
extensible architectural layers, explore the features of each
layer, and share insights from real-world deployment, including usage patterns and incident management strategies.
As part of our commitment to advancing shared ML cluster
management, we open-source SING’s resources to support
the development and operation of similar systems.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707266

CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Distributed architectures.
Keywords: Shared GPU Cluster; Multi-tenant Cluster Operations; Resource Management
ACM Reference Format:
Kaiqiang Xu, Decang Sun, Hao Wang, Zhenghang Ren, Xinchen
Wan, Xudong Liao, Zilong Wang, Junxue Zhang, and Kai Chen.
2025. Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters
on Campus. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3669940.3707266

1

Introduction

In the age of large machine learning (ML) models [6, 38],
there has been a significant increase in the need for GPU
clusters. This surge in demand has been met with substantial
research funding and human capital investments in universities throughout the world [28]. However, not all campus
infrastructures are equal, and many universities do not have
the expertise to make the best use of shared GPU clusters.
In most cases, campus IT (or graduate students) pick a tool
that they are familiar with (e.g., Slurm [41]) and use it as-is
with sub-optimal settings. Consequently, they end up underutilizing the already limited resources, putting a significant
barrier to the democratization of access to ML.
Effective management of a shared GPU cluster requires
addressing a hierarchical set of system challenges, including
cluster management frameworks [41, 50], scheduling strategies [34, 47], network transport protocols [1, 52], topology

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

design [7, 27], and other system configurations [3, 26]. A
brief online search yields numerous inquiries [32, 36, 37] for
advice on managing shared GPU clusters. Our observations
indicate that fellow researchers invest significant effort in
exploring software solutions, and frequently struggle with
improving the clusters’ usability, stability, and performance
to meet expectations.
Admittedly, a wealth of information is available online
offering recommendations [16, 40] for managing shared clusters. However, effectively leveraging these solutions for a
research-focused, shared GPU cluster demands deep expertise and continuous operational effort for evaluation, deployment, and maintenance.
Consider multi-user resource allocation as an example: A
simple and common approach to GPU sharing is to provide
direct shell access to users, which can result in system instability arising from users concurrently running computing
processes, competing for memory resources, potentially disrupting each other’s runtime dependencies, and requiring
manual coordination and careful cleanup. On the flip side,
Kubernetes [50], a widely adopted cluster manager, is known
to be effort-demanding in deployment. Originally designed
for internet backend services, Kubernetes features a complex
architecture with service-hosting capabilities like load balancing and rollbacks but lacks native support for user-access
control and job queuing for resource sharing. These complexities create engineering challenges and overhead when
applied to ML model training jobs in campus ML clusters.
Details of existing solutions are discussed in §2.
In this paper, we present our experience from the design
and operation of SING, a shared GPU cluster tailored for ML
research in academic institutions.
Design: SING streamlines ML job processing into four
system layers: job profile, adapter, scheduling, and execution (§3). Each layer utilizes a low-maintenance software
stack that efficiently handles tasks like job scheduling and
user isolation, while minimizing burdens in operation. We
employ effective resource allocation strategies to prevent low
resource utilization and improve fairness during allocation.
Operation: Launched in early 2021, SING has become a
cornerstone of our institution’s AI research infrastructure,
managing over 160 GPUs and serving over 480 active users.
These users have submitted over 28,000 ML jobs, which generated experiment results that contribute to about 40 peerreviewed ML papers. We present a comprehensive analysis
of SING’s usage patterns, job characteristics, and our incident
handling experiences (§5). We will also release job trace data
to facilitate further research in this area (§6).
At its core, SING places a strong emphasis on simplicity
and stability when it comes to selecting software stacks.
In line with the constraints of limited manpower within research teams, our approach to designing and choosing SING’s
components is guided by the principle of achieving minimal

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

viability while still fulfilling the essential requirements for
running ML jobs. To facilitate this design goal, SING adopts a
4-layer architectural abstraction, connecting its components
that handle the compilation, scheduling, and execution of
user-submitted jobs within the cluster. The detailed exploration of SING’s interface, internal workflow, and system
configurations can be found in §3.
SING offers a user-friendly interface from the local command line, allowing users to submit jobs with code, configurations, and specified resources. This workflow is also
referred to as Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) [55].
For maximum usability, SING supports two job formats simultaneously: scripting (submitting a script, which is widely
used with HPC clusters and adopted into ML computing) and
containerizing (submitting a Dockerfile [10] describing a container that runs the job). Similar to cloud services providers,
SING automates resource provisioning for job execution, but
with additional ML-specific features including dependency
setup, job queuing and scheduling, port forwarding, interactive debugging, and access to logs and outputs.
SING is designed with extensibility, allowing cluster operators to employ alternative options in the layers of SING
to achieve new capabilities. Beyond the default software
selections that prioritize architectural simplicity and operational efficiency, we also discuss scaling opportunities such
as expanding the executor backend to cloud platforms.
During developing and operating SING, balancing userfriendliness with operational efficiency was challenging. We
refined our design choices by monitoring user interactions
and analyzing anonymous usage data, while addressing performance bottlenecks and resolving instances of failures and
incidents. We delve into these operational insights, focusing
on usage patterns, job characteristics, and incident handling
and prevention in §5.
This paper contributes to the field in two main aspects:
• Operation-Efficient Design (§3): SING stands out as an
accessible solution that manages a shared GPU cluster
and achieves operational efficiency (i.e., low maintenance
cost and high resource utilization), specifically addressing
the challenges posed by limited manpower in research
teams. We describe seven core features of SING’s design
that contribute to its operational efficiency.
• Operational Insights (§5): We track and analyze usage
patterns and job characteristics and also share our experiences in incident handling during the operation of SING.
These data and experiences offer valuable insights into
the design and operation of similar campus ML clusters.
This paper represents our ongoing effort aimed at improving the management of shared ML clusters in academic
institutions. We make the source code, software stack configurations, and SING job traces (§6) available to assist in
deploying and operating similar facilities.

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Table 1. Comparison of existing solutions for shared ML clusters. The analysis considers each solution’s core features without
extensive customization. References to #1-7 correspond to SING’s features described in §3.
Feature Category

Direct Shell Access

Resource Management
Job Resource Access
SSH & Linux Permissions
Resource Scheduling
Manual Coordination
Job Execution & Monitoring
Work Description
Manual Command
Dependency Setup
Manual Command
Job Monitoring
Server Login
User Experience and Complexity
User Learning Curve
Simple - Basic Shell
Operator Setup Cost
Low - Basic Linux
Maintenance Cost
High - Stability / Conflicts

2

Traditional HPC

Container Platforms

SING

Login Node Submission
FCFS, Queuing

Deploy Container via UI/CLI
Quota-based

User Local Submission (#2)
Optimized FCFS (#4)

Job Script
Container File
Script Execution
Container Initialization
Offline Debug with Output Log
Moderate - Job Script
Moderate - Install Software
Moderate - Stability Issues

Background and Motivations

The growing demand for GPUs has led to significant financial and human resource investments. However, effectively
managing shared GPU clusters presents complex challenges,
including resource and environment provisioning, usability
and stability issues, and resource allocation efficiency.
2.1

Existing Solutions for Shared ML Clusters

In this section, we analyze the workflows of three common
solutions for managing shared ML clusters. In Table 1, we
summarize their advantages and disadvantages.
2.1.1 Direct Shell Access Sharing. A common approach
is to grant users native shell access to GPU-equipped machines through SSH, allowing direct interaction with GPU
resources. However, due to the lack of resource isolation and
management mechanisms, this method raises concerns about
system stability and security. Without careful coordination,
it can result in conflicts between competing user sessions,
degrading system performance and making it difficult to
ensure fair resource allocation.
Users typically follow the following workflow:
Step 1. User Connection: Users connect to GPU nodes via
SSH, gaining direct access to GPU resources.
Step 2. Manual Environment Setup: Users are responsible for manually configuring their runtime environments,
including installing necessary libraries and dependencies.
Step 3. Resource Allocation: Users must manually coordinate GPU resources through other channels, to avoid potential conflicts or performance degradation.
Step 4. Job Execution and Cleanup: Users initiate ML tasks
by running their scripts directly on GPU nodes, requiring
them to manually manage job execution and clean up the
environment after the job finishes.
Analysis. While this approach offers simplicity in terms of
user access, it presents significant drawbacks.
First, users are required to manually configure their runtime environments, including the installation of necessary

Complex - Container Skills
High - Complex Architecture
High - Limited ML Job Support

Multi-Format Support (#1) &
Early-Init & Caching (#5)
Interactive Monitoring (#3)
Moderate - Intuitive Workflow (#6)
Low to Moderate Cost (§4) &
with Executor Extensibility (#7)

libraries and dependencies. This manual setup process can be
error-prone and time-consuming, adding to the operational
burden and potentially risking system stability.
Furthermore, users must proactively take responsibility
for coordinating GPU sharing, initiating ML tasks, and cleaning up their environment afterward. It can potentially introduce conflicts between concurrent user sessions, which
not only degrades system performance but also makes it
challenging to ensure fair resource allocation.
2.1.2 Traditional HPC Solution. Universities often adopt
cluster workload management solutions from traditional
High-Performance Computing (HPC) clusters, with the Slurm
workload manager [41] being a popular choice. Slurm provides job queueing and scheduling capabilities in clusters.
In Slurm, users follow a more structured workflow:
Step 1. Job Submission: Users submit ML job requests from
a login node to the Slurm, with resource request specified.
Step 2. Job Queueing: Slurm is responsible for job queuing
and scheduling, using built-in schedulers.
Step 3. Runtime Environment: Users generally need to set
up the runtime environments within the job script, as there
is a lack of support for managing ML dependencies in Slurm.
Step 4. Execution: The system bootstraps and executes the
ML job on allocated nodes, and releases resources afterwards.
Analysis. Slurm lacks support for provisioning the complex dependency environments required by ML jobs, posing
engineering difficulties to individual users. Job preparation
and submission are required to be done on the login nodes
of a Slurm cluster, and the login node often becomes a single point of failure [15, 46], due to unexpected user actions
on the node (see detailed discussion in §3.1). Furthermore,
Slurm’s coarse-grained resource allocation mechanisms may
lead to resource fragmentations and underutilization under
certain submission orders and job characteristics [11].
Opportunity. Originally tailored for MPI applications, Slurm
stood out for its simplicity and performance. ML training
jobs in research often resemble MPI applications, using advanced MPI techniques [25, 43]. This similarity brings ML

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

job scheduling within Slurm’s scope. In this paper, our solution involves augmenting Slurm with ML-specific features
that transform it into an effective tool for shared ML clusters.

strategies to enhance cluster efficiency, such as reducing
average job completion time. These schedulers can be integrated into cluster managers like Slurm, Kubernetes, and
SING, which manage the entire ML job lifecycle.

2.1.3 Container Platforms. Container orchestration platforms such as Kubernetes [50] have garnered widespread
adoption in the industry for managing large-scale distributed
applications. Recently, Kubernetes has also been used to manage shared ML clusters, especially in production clusters with
user-facing ML applications.
In containerized solutions such as Kubernetes, users follow
a workflow centered around container orchestration:
Step 1. Containerization: Users package their ML program
and runtime dependencies into containers by writing a description file in a specific format.
Step 2. Container Deployment: Users submit container images on the Kubernetes cluster, specifying resource requests.
Step 3. Job Scheduling: Kubernetes schedules pods on available nodes, managing resource allocation.
Step 4. Job Execution: Containers are initiated to execute
ML tasks, with Kubernetes handling creation and releasing.

Computing Frameworks. Distributed computing frameworks such as Ray [23] and Spark [59] parallelize large jobs
for efficient distributed execution. These distributed systems
are programming frameworks used directly in user code,
which can be submitted as a part of the user’s job to cluster
managers. These systems also support an optional "cluster
mode" similar to a cluster manager and we discuss this in §8.

Analysis. Designed for internet services, Kubernetes has
a complex architecture with features like service discovery,
load balancing, and feature rollouts and rollbacks. In the
context of ML research, these complexities are unnecessary
and introduce engineering overhead.
More importantly, Kubernetes lacks native support for
user-level access control and job queuing essential for shared
ML clusters, each requiring a separate set of tools and configurations [30] to be added on top of Kubernetes. Therefore,
deploying and maintaining a Kubernetes setup demands considerable effort from cluster operators, including integration,
testing, and ongoing maintenance.
Meanwhile, for users without prior experience, creating
containers can be error-prone [39] with Dockerfile, and replicating a cluster environment locally for error reproduction
is challenging and often requires operator assistance.
Overall, both users and operators face a steep learning
curve with Kubernetes, requiring skill development to manage their inherent complexities effectively [30].
Opportunity. Container platforms like Kubernetes are powerful server operation tools, and SING’s design does not conflict with them. SING uses an adapter layer that can operate
over any execution layer, including container platforms or
computing clouds, allowing resource extensibility while remaining transparent to the users.
2.2

Cluster Schedulers and Computing Frameworks

This section provides a brief overview of related systems
that also operate in cluster environments. A more detailed
discussion can be found in §8.
ML Cluster Schedulers. State-of-the-art schedulers, such
as Sia [47], Pollux [34], and Gavel [24], optimize scheduling

2.3

Motivations and Requirements

Current ML cluster management solutions reveal limitations
in usability and operational efficiency in multi-tenant environments. SING’s design is motivated by the need for a
simple, stable, and efficient solution for managing shared
ML clusters in research institutions.
An effective solution should address three objectives:
1. Reduce Operational Complexity: Leverage a stable and
low-maintenance architecture to reduce operational workload for cluster operators compared to existing solutions.
2. Improve User Accessibility: Provide a clear and accessible interface that simplifies ML job submission and monitoring, reducing the learning curve for users.
3. Enable Fair and Efficient Resource Allocation: Ensure fair resource allocation to maximize utilization while
maintaining system responsiveness.
SING addresses these requirements with a full-stack architecture designed for ML workflows, introducing features
such as multi-format job support, optimized first-come-firstserve (FCFS) scheduling, and environment caching. SING
aims to create a more stable and user-friendly environment
for shared ML cluster operations.

3

Design and Implementation

SING’s core architecture design follows a four-layer abstraction to define, construct, and execute user-submitted ML jobs
within a shared ML cluster. As illustrated in Figure 1, SING’s
design is structured as follows:
The Job Profile Layer allows users to define job and environment requirements with a self-contained profile syntax,
ensuring unambiguous execution of jobs.
The Adapter Layer is the interface between users and the
cluster, facilitating job submission and monitoring.
The Scheduler Layer manages resource allocation and job
scheduling, employing an optimized FCFS with a backfill
mechanism to prioritize and utilize resources efficiently.
The Executor Layer is responsible for executing ML jobs
on cluster nodes, featuring network file systems and customizable execution backends for scalability.

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

Layer 1: Job Proﬁle Layer

Job Paing

(§3.1)

job_metadata:
name: quickstart_mnist
script:
python3 mnist.py --data=/mnt/data/mnist
configurations:
- python=3.6.9

Layer 2: Adapter Layer
User-side

(§3.2)

SING Command Line Interface (CLI)
Authenticate

Submit

Interact

Extensions below this layer are transparent to users

Cluster-side

SING Cluster Service
Parse

Compile

Layer 3: Scheduler Layer

Monitor

(§3.3)

Scheduling Mechanisms

euing &
Seduling

1. Optimized FCFS w/ thresholded backﬁll
2. Tidy granularity with power-of-2 allocation
3. Reserved resource for small-scale jobs

Layer 4: Execution Layer

(§3.4)

ree Provisioning Objectives:

Provision

#1 Resource

Compute and Network Isolation

#2 Environment

Dependency Installation

#3 File Storage

Networked File Systems (Job, User)

Figure 1. SING uses 4-layer architecture to enhance the
overall efficiency and flexibility in operation.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Feature #1: Job Format Flexibility. SING supports scriptformat (common in HPC) and container-format job profiles
simultaneously. Users can specify their preferred format by
indicating it in the 𝑗𝑜𝑏 section and providing either an execution script or a container file (Dockerfile) in the 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
section of the job profile. This versatility in format minimizes
migration costs during job submissions across different computing environments. Subsequently, the job profile is compiled into executable scripts by the adapter layer (§3.2) before
being submitted to the scheduler layer (§3.3) for execution.
Comparing to traditional HPC clusters. Having a profile
layer eliminates the need for setting up a server from where
users submit jobs via Slurm toolchains. In traditional HPC
clusters, this server often called a login node, is a common
single point of failure. Some users might unintentionally
execute their job scripts directly on the login node, either for
debugging purposes or due to workflow misunderstandings.
Running scripts locally on the login node can fully occupy
its computing or memory resources, rendering it unresponsive and preventing other users from submitting new jobs.
This can disrupt the system and potentially lead to a clusterwide outage. Despite warnings from HPC cluster operation
teams [32, 46], such incidents still happen as they cannot be
completely prevented [15], necessitating manual recovery
by the operation team which can be time-consuming.
Another advantage of using the job profile is its selfcontained and repeatable nature. Users can save and reuse
their job profiles for recurring tasks, simplifying job submission. Moreover, these profiles can be shared with others
to replicate experiments, fostering collaboration and reproducibility within the research community.
Job Profile Example: quickstart_mnist.conf

This abstraction offers a key advantage by decoupling the
ML job execution workflow to independent input and output
in each layer, creating a versatile design framework where
different components can be combined to accomplish the
cluster management objective.

job_metadata:
name: quickstart_minst
resource: sing_gpu_1 # Select target resource group.
nodes: 4
# Peer IPs provided during runtime.
gpu: 2
# Number of GPUs requested per node.
format: script # Job format: script or container.
script: quickstart.sh

3.1

Layer 1: Job Profile Layer

Jobs submitted to SING are defined using job profiles, and an
example showing the syntax of these profiles is in Figure 2.
These profiles consist of the following sections:
1. Metadata and Resource Request: users specify resource
requirements, including the selected resource group, number of nodes (which can be a range), the number of GPUs
required on each node, and the format of the job code.
2. Job Code: this section points to the entry point of the
user’s job code, which can be a script or a container file.
3. Configurations: users specify the job’s configurations, such
as runtime libraries like CUDA version and programming
dependencies like Python packages.

# The submitted script

container: quickstart.dockerfile # or, a container file.
configurations:
# For script-format only.
- python=3.6.9
# Dependencies are configured
- cudatoolkit=11.1.0 # through Conda and bash scripts.
- pytorch=1.9.0

Figure 2. Example job profile where users specify job requirements, code entry point, and configurations.

3.2

Layer 2: Adapter Layer

The adapter layer takes the user’s job profile from the previous layer and submits it to the ML cluster. It also offers

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Job Proﬁle

User
Side

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

SING Command Line Interface

job...
entrypoint...
environment...

Authenticate

SING Cluster Service

Submit

Interact

Seduling &
Execution

Cluster
Side
Parse

Compile

Monitor

Figure 3. Workflow and functions of the adapter layer.
user interfaces for functions like monitoring running jobs,
retrieving output files, and streaming logs.
The adapter layer is referred to as such because it is programmed against the job schedulers in the layer below. It
abstracts the complexity of the cluster manager’s functionalities and provides a user-friendly interface for job submission
and monitoring.
Our implementation, illustrated in Figure 3, comprises
two components: SING-cli and SING-service, running locally
on user computers and on the cluster, respectively.
SING-cli (SING Command Line Interface), is a local software distributed to SING users. It stores cluster configurations, such as the cluster’s IP and login credentials, and connects with the cluster. Beyond authentication, the cli acts as
a thin layer that wraps around the services provided by SINGservice, providing commands that facilitate job submission
and access to other SING-service functionalities.
SING-service operates on a cluster node and receives instructions from the cli. When a job is submitted, the service
compiles the job files by parsing the job profile and converting it into the scheduler’s recognized format. This process
includes mapping configuration parameters and packaging
code files before passing them to the scheduler layer. SINGservice also provides job monitoring functions, such as fetching job status and accessing output files and logs.
Connection Security. SING-cli uses remote command execution over an SSH tunnel to invoke functions in SINGservice. To authenticate users, their public key—created during registration—is added to the dedicated cluster node that
runs SING-service. This setup does not allow users to log
in directly to the cluster node, thereby reducing the risk of
unexpected user actions on the node that could disrupt operations (as discussed in §3.1). A more secure approach that
offers better isolation between the client and cluster is to
implement SING-service functions as HTTP APIs, connected
over HTTPS with password authentication. However, we opt
for remote command execution as it offers more flexibility
(e.g., file uploads) with less engineering effort. We discuss
potential security concerns related to this solution in §7.

We discuss two key features of the adapter layer and provide details of our implementation as follows.
Feature #2: Multi-format Job Compilation. Job compilation in SING enables jobs in various formats to be transformed into a standardized output script that the backend
can interpret and execute. Since this compilation process
is handled on the cluster side (Figure 3), the same SING-cli
can connect to different clusters running SING-service without requiring user code modifications. This design supports
extensibility across various execution backends. While our
SING implementation uses Slurm [41] as the execution backend, community extensions (§6) have enabled integration
with alternative backends—or even multiple backends simultaneously based on a routing strategy—without adding
usability burdens on the user side.
For script-format jobs, the SING-service identifies required
dependencies and injects scripts to prepare the environment.
This, for example, includes setting the LD_LIBRARY_PATH to
switch between pre-installed CUDA versions [58] on cluster
nodes and initializing Conda [3] for Python dependencies.
We optimize Conda initialization by caching environments
using MD5 hashes of sorted dependency lists, enabling instant retrieval for recurring jobs with identical requirements.
For container-format jobs, which are self-contained packages, the job is passed to the scheduler layer for resource
allocation. After that, the compute node invokes container
runtimes (such as Docker or Containerd [8]) to execute the
provided container file directly. Optionally, script-format
jobs can also be encapsulated into a container file to simplify
execution, albeit with an added layer of abstraction.
After compilation, the job is submitted to the specified
resource group and cluster. This layer provides extensibility by allowing the SING-cli to connect to SING-service on
different computation clusters (varying in location, speed,
or cost) without user code modification. Additionally, the
SING-service compiles the job profile into different output
scripts suitable for its respective cluster.
Feature #3: Interactive Job Monitoring. Many research
projects running on our cluster involve ongoing development and exploratory experiments. Users therefore need
to interact with their jobs in real time, especially when debugging or monitoring the training process. Hence, SING
provides the following interactive features.
1. Remote port forwarding. For real-time debugging tools
such as Jupyter Notebook or TensorBoard, SING-service dynamically edits port forwarding rules on the cluster gateway
server, which runs HAProxy [17]. This setup exposes the
container’s port through a randomly assigned port on the
gateway. Users can then access the service using the gateway’s public IP and the forwarded port. Once the job is
stopped, the executor backend automatically triggers [42]
the removal of the port forwarding rule. Note that this approach opens a public port on the gateway server, which

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

3.3

Layer 3: Scheduler Layer

The scheduling layer is responsible for making decisions on
the allocation of resources. ML cluster scheduling is a popular
research area. However, as many approaches improve cluster
efficiency by evaluating jobs with performance factors such
as estimated job completion time, resource utilization, and
statistical efficiency, they may not be suitable for shared ML
clusters in research institutions because:
• They determine the order of job execution based on optimization algorithms targeting cluster-wide metrics. This
approach may sometimes result in unfair resource allocation from the perspective of individual users.
• They often require modifications to user code, including
model hyperparameters like batch size, to exploit optimization opportunities. In the context of ML research, such
modifications are less desirable, if not unacceptable, as
echoed in recent literature [18].
SING incorporates the following mechanisms to improve
cluster-wide resource utilization while being fair to individual users, as illustrated in Figure 4. Resource abuse prevention is discussed in §5.3.
Feature #4: Fair FCFS with Backfill. SING’s scheduling approach is analogous to the way universities manage their
public facilities, recognizing that ML clusters function as
university-wide shared resources. Fairness in this context
means that resource requests are generally processed on a
first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis to ensure equal access
for all users. However, to enhance overall cluster efficiency,

# of nodes

# of GPUs

could allow unauthorized access if the service behind the
forwarded port lacks authentication. We discuss this security
risk and a potential solution in §7.
2. Remote SSH access. Users can gain SSH access to the
remote host (either a server or a container) where their job
is running to perform debugging tasks. To facilitate this connection, SING-service generates a one-time SSH key pair
and adds the public key to the authorized keys file on the
remote host. The service then exposes the SSH port of the
remote host on the gateway server using the previously mentioned port forwarding function. The private key is securely
transmitted back to SING-cli via the cli-to-service connection
(§3.2). SING-cli then use this private key to establish an SSH
connection to the remote host through the gateway. After
the job stops, both the key pair and the port forwarding rule
are removed.
3. Retrieving log and output files. SING-cli can download or
stream remote files (similar to tail –follow) in the job’s
runtime directory to access output or log.
In practice, to prevent low resource utilization resulting
from remote job debugging, we restrict the usage of remote
functions to jobs that require two or fewer GPUs. This encourages users to initially test their jobs with fewer resources
and scale up once the testing phase is complete.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

1 queuing

2

FCFS

Backﬁll
Mechanism

Tidy
Granularity

Reserved
Resource for
Small Jobs

Figure 4. SING’s scheduler layer implements mechanisms
to improve cluster-wide resource utilization.
certain requests may be given higher priority than earlier
ones, as detailed below, in order to improve cluster-wide
resource utilization.
SING uses a scheduling strategy that combines optimized
FCFS with a backfill mechanism, as depicted in Figure 4.
When a job is submitted, it is placed in a queue, awaiting
execution. The scheduler engages in a bin-packing process to
determine if there are sufficient available resources to start
the next job. In cases where the available resources cannot
satisfy the first job in the queue, the backfill mechanism will
help avoid head-of-line blocking due to large jobs in the front
of the queue: it temporally skips the first job and evaluates
the subsequent jobs to identify the ones that can be executed
with available resources.
Next, we introduce strategies that further enhance cluster utilization by minimizing fragmentation and prioritizing
smaller jobs. The usage statistics in §5 validate the effectiveness of these strategies.
Threshold for Backfilled Requests. In some cases, the
backfill mechanism may lead to the starvation of the first job,
especially if the first job request is large while the subsequent
request is small. To address this, we restrict the total number
of allocated GPUs for backfilled requests with a threshold (in
SING, we set the threshold to the size of the first job request).
Once this limit is reached, priority is given to the first job to
make sure it will be scheduled next. Algorithm 1 illustrates
the pseudocode of this scheduling strategy.
Tidy Granularity. SING accepts two-dimensional resource
requests: the number of nodes and the number of GPUs per
node. To prevent fragmentation in the bin-packing process,
we have established a limited granularity for the quantity of
GPUs in each node type, offering preset choices of 1/2/4/8GPU nodes. Additionally, when users request multiple nodes,
they must select nodes of the same type. These predefined
granularities, when carefully scheduled with bin-packing
algorithms [51], can enhance resource utilization as they
minimize small fragments during scheduling. From a user

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

Algorithm 1: Optimized FCFS with Backfill
Input:
• Job Queue 𝒬, Backfill Threshold 𝒯
1 begin
/* Decide the next job to run
2
𝑗𝑜𝑏 = 𝒬.peek()
/* Check the first job in queue
3
if available(job) then
4
𝒬.pop()
5
𝒯 = 𝒬.peek().GPUs
6
return job
/* Try backfilling jobs
7
for backfill_job in 𝒬 do
8
if available(backfill_job) and
𝒯 ≥ backfill_job.GPUs then
/* Reduce backfill threshold
9
𝒯 = 𝒯 - backfill_job.GPUs
10
return backfill_job
11
end
12 end

network storage. This network storage is accessible to all
nodes (as described in Feature #6 in §3.4).
To further reduce job startup time, SING caches the dependency environment and container images locally on each
node. When a job is started on compute nodes, SING first
checks if the resource is available without accessing the
nodes’ network storage. If not, the environment is fetched
to the local node for job execution and cached there for subsequent executions, unless purged due to local storage space
constraints under the LRU cache replacement policy.

*/
*/

3.4
*/

*/

perspective, these choices of granularities align well with
typical ML experiment settings (i.e., powers of two). The
allocation of CPU and memory is proportional to the number
of GPUs in each node type, which facilitates data processing
during GPU training. This approach is generally sufficient
based on our operational experience, as our GPU nodes are
equipped with 40-core CPUs and 256GB of memory (which
exceeds the total GPU memory on a node). For tasks that
require only CPU or memory resources, we recommend
using CPU clusters.
Reserved Resource for Small Jobs. Another effective strategy we implemented is the prioritization for smaller jobs (illustrated in Figure 4). We partition some 8-GPU nodes into
1/2/4-GPU nodes with isolated computation and network environments with SR-IOV [29], which allows a single physical
NIC to appear as multiple virtual NICs with minimal performance loss [22]. These nodes are exclusively allocated to
serve small requests. This strategy offers priority incentives
that encourage users to request fewer resources when they
only need to debug or quickly test for a few epochs, reducing the waiting time for other users. This optimization also
implicitly resembles the effects of a short-job-first strategy,
which reduces the waiting time for queueing jobs.
Feature #5: Early-Initialization and Caching. When jobs
are queued and awaiting execution, SING accelerates the
bootstrap stage by pre-initializing Conda environments (for
script-format jobs) or building container images (for containerformat jobs) as immutable directories stored in distributed

Layer 4: Execution Layer

The executor layer is where job profiles become instances
and bootstrap for execution, and it provides necessary architecture support for parallel computation and resource
isolations for multi-job processing. Figure 5 illustrates the
topology and architecture of SING that supports distributed
job execution. SING utilizes Slurm [41] as the default backend
and this section discuss its capability and our enhancements
to Slurm to make it a better fit for ML cluster management.
§6 discusses a community work that utilizes Kubernetes for
executor backend in SING’s architecture. §8 discusses the
reason why we choose Slurm as default backend.

Stage 1: Job Proﬁle and Submission
resource
request

job entrypoint
script or container

code & data
package

local job packaging
job submission

SING-cli
Stage 2: Compilation & Scheduling
compilation

ML job
executable

SING-service
earlyinitialization

workload
manager & scheduler
Stage 3: Computing

queuing &
execution

compute node

compute node

Stage 4: Network Storage
Job Runtime
Directory
Prioritize Sync

User Directory
Persistent Store

environment
cache
Environments

conda dependencies,
container image

Figure 5. An end-to-end workflow of job processing in SING,
from job submission to execution.

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Feature #6: Distributed Job Bootstrapping. Each cluster
node runs a Slurm agent that manages job processes. For parallel jobs spanning multiple nodes, an environment variable
with assigned IPs facilitates peer connections. The agent
executes the compiled job script from the job profile in
the adapter layer (in §3.2), starting the initialized environment (Conda or container) and calling the job script within
it. This environment is pre-initialized and cached in the network file system, as described in Feature #5 (§3.3).
We deploy a network file system with RDMA support
using GlusterFS [13] for file synchronization across nodes
and to prevent file duplication. There are two user-level file
spaces: the job runtime directory and the user directory. Both
directories are accessible during job runtime or using SINGcli but offer different Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees.
The user directory provides persistent storage shared across
multiple job submissions, prioritizing stable storage over
synchronization speed. In contrast, the job runtime directory
offers faster storage that only persists for a short period after
job completion unless the user submits a new job. Otherwise,
it is automatically purged.

Table 2. Breakdown of estimated human efforts for building
the SING solution in a new cluster.

Feature #7: Heterogeneous Executor Backends. SING’s
executor backend, Slurm, operates under a "controller-agent"
model. In this setup, the controller acts as a puppet master,
managing resource groups, while agents run on compute
nodes to execute jobs. The controller can partition resources
into different groups (e.g., CPU-only, consumer GPU, datacenter GPU), allowing users to specify the cluster and optionally the resource group to meet heterogeneous hardware
requirements, while SING enforces user resource quotas.
Additionally, resources can be added or removed from the
cluster simply by starting or stopping the agent. This model
enables dynamic scaling of resources across the cluster, allowing it to adapt to varying workloads and user demands. Additionally, cloud-based compute nodes can be scaled through
an agent running in the cloud, which connects back to the
controller. We utilize a self-built cloud instance image (e.g.,
Amazon Machine Images [2]) that embeds the agent and
starts it automatically at instance boot, to simplify the process. This approach ensures scalability and flexibility, adding
additional resources to the cluster while remaining transparent to users. Future implementations may fully automate
scaling operations based on cluster occupancy and cloud
resource budgets.
3.5

SING Implementation

We implement the scheduling and execution layer of SING
based on Slurm [41], which is extended to support the scheduling policies in §3.3. We selected Slurm for its popularity
and simplicity in academic cluster management (further discussion in §8). We note that Kubernetes [50] can provide
similar functionality and can also serve as the executor backend for SING, which has been developed in the Kubernetes
community and is discussed in §6.

Tasks / Steps

Est. Person-Days
Ground-up

Adopt

1. Basic OS and GPU Driver Configs

2

2

2. Cluster Softwares: Slurm and NFS

4

3

3. Integrate SING-cli and -service

8

2

4. Testing & Documentation

3

1

4

Usability and Accessibility

This section discusses the usability of SING’s design from
the perspective of cluster operators and users, reflected by
its operational workload and user experience.
4.1

Operation and Maintenance Cost

Table 2 compares the estimated human effort needed to build
SING from scratch (17 person-days), or adopt the open-source
SING configuration and code (8 person-days). The difference
is mainly due to SING-cli and SING-service development and
figuring out software configurations. See our open-source
plan in §6.
Installing System Software. The effort required for the
initial deployment varies depending on the operation team’s
familiarity with Linux software configurations. For instance,
setting up GlusterFS for the networked file system and Slurm
for the scheduler is relatively straightforward if the team
efficiently understands and follows their well-documented
setup procedures. Meanwhile, they also have a large community where solutions to most deployment issues can be
readily found.
Service Requests and Maintenance. The operation team’s
day-to-day workload is primarily on responding to user requests and maintaining the cluster’s stability:
• To reduce basic service requests, our team provide clear
job examples under various distribution settings and programming frameworks, helping users quickly get started
with these templates. We also outlines detailed steps and
best practices for job debugging. As a result, over the past
12 months, our cluster has seen an average of one service
request for every 940 jobs submitted.
• System failures in SING are rare due to the minimalism
in software architecture, which minimizes the risks of
software failure. Hardware and networking issues, such
as network file system delays, are discussed in §5.
4.2

User Experience

Our design strives to improve users experience for ML clusters, yielding several key advantages, as discussed below.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

Total Users

User-Friendly Features. SING-cli offers a suite of functions
tailored to typical ML research workflows, allowing users
to easily access remote resources. These functions include
remote file uploads/downloads, attaching bash environment,
and remote port forwarding.

5

Operation and Analysis

We analyze SING’s performance and usage over 2.5 years
to offer insights into academic ML cluster operation. The
cluster consists of 128 Nvidia GTX 3090 GPUs on 16 nodes.
We first analyze cluster-wide trends including temporal
patterns (§5.1) and job-specific characteristics (§5.2). Then,
we discuss the experiences and actions taken to handle resource bottlenecks and hardware failures (§5.3). Finally, we
present the schema of the SING cluster trace, a more comprehensive trace compared to prior work in §6.
5.1

Usage Statistics: Temporal Patterns

SING exhibited various temporal patterns during operation.
These patterns are instrumental in planning for capacity and
system maintenance schedules. Unless otherwise specified,
the period under review in this section is for the 30 months
from July 2021 to December 2023.
Number of Users. Figure 6 shows periodic surges in new
user registrations for SING, where spikes are visible around
September and February, aligning with the distribution of
email newsletters at the beginning of each semester to introduce new researchers to the platforms. Outside these periods,
user growth is steady and gradual, attributed to word-ofmouth referrals. Additionally, the data reflects an increasing
trend in new user registrations over time, showing the growing popularity of the SING within our institution.
Task Submissions. Figure 7a shows the task submission
statistics of SING, demonstrating a consistent growth in task
submissions, with over 200 weekly average submissions. Notable submission spikes are observed around January 2022,

0

50
2022

2023

2024

Figure 6. User growth and weekly active users.
Total Tasks

Weekly New Tasks

25,000

600
400

15,000

200

5,000
2022

2023

2024

(a) Number of total tasks and weekly new tasks from 2021 to 2023.
100
# of Tasks

Summary. Cluster operation includes both problem prevention and resolution. We prioritize prevention by adhering to
design principles that reduce architectural complexity and
use foolproof interfaces. For resolution, please see §5.3.

150
100

200

Simplified Environment Management. Users no longer
need to maintain two sets of scripts for local and remote
executions. The job profile encapsulates all environment
dependencies as well as scripts to start the ML process, and
the steps to execute jobs locally and remotely are identical.
Documentation. The user documentation for SING offers
a detailed collection of clear and intuitive examples for job
submissions, ranging from basic workflow testing to hybrid parallel training. These examples help users to quickly
understand the interface and functionality of SING, providing easy-to-follow solutions while reducing the operational
team’s workload in addressing user inquiries.

Weekly Active Users

400

50
0

Sun Mon Tue Wed u Fri Sat

(b) Tasks over a week

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2
0

6

12

18

24

0

(c) Tasks over a day

Figure 7. Task submissions over a year in monthly, daily,
and hourly submission patterns.
late April to early May 2022, and late January 2023, possibly
corresponding to periods with paper submission deadlines.
Figure 7b shows a mid-week peak in task submissions, particularly on Wednesdays, and gradually decreases towards
the weekends, with the lowest on Sundays. Figure 7c illustrates a daily trend where submissions are minimal in
the early morning, gradually increasing and peaking in late
evenings, especially between 10pm through 1am the next day.
This trend may reflect researchers’ late-night work habits
and highlights the importance of a low-maintenance cluster,
given the limited availability of operators during late hours.
GPU Occupancy Patterns. Figure 8 illustrates the GPU occupancy rate over a busy week, with the x-axis representing
hours from 0 to 167, corresponding to Sunday 0am to Saturday 11pm. During the sampled period, SING experienced
job oversubscription for about 30% of the time, with peaks
lasting around two hours. We calculate the GPU assignment
rate as the sum of assigned GPUs at each hour divided by the
sum of the minimum value between the number of requested
GPUs and the cluster capacity at each hour. This approach
reflects utilization adjusted for demand. SING maintained a
GPU assignment rate of over 96%, reflecting the effectiveness
of our backfilling scheduling mechanism (§3.3). Less than 4%

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

# of GPU
# Requested
200

# Allocated

SJF

FCFS

150 Capacity
100
50
0

50

100

150

Figure 8. GPU occupancy over a week, from Sunday 0am to
Saturday 11pm (168 hours).
kWh
20

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

contributes to the low average queueing time). However, in
terms of tail (maximum) queueing times, SING, FCFS, and
SJF recorded 7.2, 7.4, and 10.2 hours, respectively, indicating
that SJF may lead to starvation for longer jobs.
Power Consumption Metrics. Figure 9 illustrates the
power consumption over the same time frame as the GPU
occupancy graph. Max power draw is crucial for cluster planning. The primary reasons for the remaining differences are
as follows: (1) the base power draw, which includes the idle
power of the CPU, GPU, and other components, is relatively
constant and independent of the GPU occupancy rate; and
(2) the GPU utilization rate also influences power draw [57],
meaning that two jobs occupying the same number of GPUs
may exhibit different power consumption if one job is more
computationally intensive than the other.

10

5.2
50

100

150

Figure 9. Cluster-wide power draw over the same time period as in Figure 8, showing the GPU power is dominant.
of GPUs are idle during the oversubscription period due to resource fragmentation, optimized by pre-defined granularity
and the bin-packing algorithm (§3.3).
Comparing with Alternative Scheduling Policies. Using the job trace shown in Figure 8, we conducted a minievaluation of alternative scheduling policies to determine
job priorities and compare their performance with SING. We
replay the job trace in a simulator. The simulator functions
as a step-based discrete-time system with a 1-minute granularity, resulting in 10,080 steps for this evaluation. Each step
performs three tasks:
1. Calculate job progress to identify completions.
2. Check the job trace and add new arrivals to the queue.
3. Apply scheduling policy to start new jobs.
We compared two baseline policies: (1) the First-Come,
First-Served (FCFS) policy, which is the default in Slurm, and
(2) the Short-Job-First (SJF) policy used in Lucid [18], where
we provided the exact running time to simulate an ideal
scenario. Like in SING, this evaluation did not include job
resource scaling or preemption. Additionally, all jobs were
subject to a 24-hour rule (§5.3), consistent with the policy
applied in SING from which the job trace was collected.
For the evaluation metrics, we examined job occupancy
rates and queueing times. The GPU assignment times for
SING, FCFS, and SJF were 96%, 75.1%, and 96.5%, respectively,
as illustrated in Figure 8. The average queueing times for
SING, FCFS, and SJF were 0.81, 1.32, and 0.64 hours, respectively. SING outperformed FCFS due to its backfill mechanism,
while SJF performed better than SING in reducing waiting
times (note that SING’s dedicated resource pool for small jobs

We present job-level characteristics of how long jobs run,
how long they wait in the queue, and how efficiently they
use resources, collected during the operation of SING.
Job Running-Time. Figure 10a illustrates the job durations
within the GPU cluster. The majority of job lengths fall below 2 hours or between 6 to 11 hours. This pattern is a result
of both user preferences and our scheduling approach. As
discussed in §3.2, SING supports interactive usage of cluster resources, such as port forwarding and remote bash access, but restricts these features to smaller job requests. This
encourages users to initially debug their jobs with smaller
resource requests. During peak hours, SING automatically
imposes a maximum runtime of 24 hours per submission to
10%
Percentage (%)

0

5%
0%

0

5

10
15
Running Time (h)

20

(a) Distribution of job run-times in the GPU cluster, with significant
clusters observed at 1-2 hours and 8-11 hours.
100%

100%

CDF(%)

0

Usage Statistics: Job-level Characteristics

50%

50%
0%

0

3
6
9
euing Time (h)

(b) Queuing-Time Distribution

0%

25% 50% 75%
euing / Total

(c) Queuing / Run-Time %

Figure 10. Analysis of job run-times (a) and queuing times
(b and c) in the GPU cluster, illustrating the distribution of
job durations and queuing times.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

ensure fair usage (§5.3). Users with longer-duration needs
are advised to checkpoint their jobs around the 12-hour mark
and submit a new job to continue after checkpointing. These
mechanisms explain the prevalence of jobs running for less
than 2 hours and between 6 to 11 hours.
Job Queuing-Time. Figures 10b and 10c displays the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of job queuing times in
hours and the queuing time as a percentage of the total job
time. These figures highlight that over 40% of jobs have no
waiting time, and more than 90% of jobs wait less than 1 hour
or 10% of their total runtime. These statistics are influenced
by SING’s design. Short jobs receive prioritized allocation
with dedicated resource and backfilling mechanism [54] to
improve cluster-wide efficiency. Longer jobs are required to
be checkpointed within 24 hours and resubmitted to prevent
excessive occupation during peak hours.
Job Sizes Distribution. Figure 11 shows the top 10 job sizes
by resource requests, with about 40% being small jobs requesting fewer than four GPUs. This is influenced by SING’s
design, which favors smaller jobs by prioritizing their execution (§3.3) and limits interactive debugging tools (§3.2)
to only small jobs. This approach motivates users to start
with smaller resource requests for initial testing and debugging, enhancing overall resource utilization. Additionally, we
make note that job sizes are restricted to powers of two (§3.3).
This restriction aids in reducing resource fragmentation in
the scheduling’s bin-packing process and does not conflict
with typical ML research experiment settings.

% of Tasks

20
10
0

1-1

1-2

1-4

1-8

2-2

2-4

2-8

4-4

4-8

8-4

Figure 11. Distribution of job sizes, measured by the number
of GPUs requested (e.g., 2-4 is two nodes with 4 GPUs each).
100%

CDF (%)

100%
1-node
2-node
4-node
8-node

50%
0%

50%
100%
Utilizations (%)

(a) GPU Utilization

50%
0%

1-node
2-node
4-node
8-node

50%
100%
Utilizations (%)

(b) GPU Memory Util.

Figure 12. CDFs of job-level GPU and memory utilization,
illustrating resource consumption across various job sizes
(i.e., number of nodes requested).

GPU Utilization and Memory Utilization. Figure 12 illustrates GPU and GPU memory utilization based on the
number of nodes requested by jobs. The utilization statistics
only account for periods when a GPU is occupied. Generally, as the number of nodes in a job increases, its utilization
decreases, suggesting possible synchronization overheads.
For 8-node jobs, the average GPU utilization is 25% and the
average GPU memory utilization is 15%. This may indicate
that communication-efficient training methods may not be
widely adopted in current ML experiments.
Table 3. Summary of issues and types of solutions.
Type

System Health Issues

Type of Solutions

Resource

Excessive Storage Usage

Policy Enforcement

Resource

Low GPU Utilization

User Guidance

Resource

Long Job Running Time

Policy Enforcement

Failure

Network File System Delay

Incidents Handling

Failure

System Configuration Lost

Incidents Handling

5.3

System Availability & Maintenance

This section shares our operational experiences with SING.
In Table 3, we summarize the actions that address availability
challenges into three types: user guidance, policy enforcement, and specific incident handling.
5.3.1 Resource Bottlenecks. Running into resource bottlenecks and limitations is the top feedback we hear from
cluster users. We employ the following mechanism to promote fair usage of resources.
Efficient Storage Usage. Training ML models often involves
accessing large model parameters and datasets. While we
have over 1PB storage space available, the rapid accumulation of files from a large user base can exhaust our disk space.
To ensure efficient storage utilization, we have implemented
the following guidance and policies:
• Public Dataset Directory. In addition to individual user
directories, we create a public directory where commonly
used large datasets [20] are stored. Users can soft link these
datasets directly to their directories, removing the need
for duplication in downloads or copies. This approach not
only prevents duplicate files but also saves download time
and bandwidth.
• File Expiration Policy. Some users store large files in their
directories that are not immediately necessary for their
job. To free up storage space and promote responsible
resource usage, we implement a file expiration policy:
files that have not been accessed for more than 60 days
are subject to deletion. To prevent accidental data loss,
this expiration process is not real-time: We initiate the
removal process at the beginning of each month and send
email notifications seven days prior to deletion.

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

GPU Utilization Monitoring. We closely monitor GPU utilization in SING to identify cases of underutilized resources,
which are often caused by non-computation-intensive tasks,
inefficient job implementations, or interactive usage (only
allowed on small nodes). Although we do not immediately
intervene, we collect data and send email notifications to
users with significantly low GPU utilization, and also offer
help for job optimization when needed.

Job Trace. The SING trace offers more detailed job characteristics and runtime measurements compared to previous
traces like Microsoft Philly [21] and Alibaba PAI [55].
• Job Submission History (36 months): 1 timestamps
at job submission, start, and completion; 2 resource requests; 3 assigned node IDs; 4 list of software dependencies (indicative of the ML model/framework used). 5 user
name and job name (anonymized through hashing, yet still
useful for inferring relationships between jobs, such as
resubmissions);
• Node Status (aggregated for every 5/10/30 minutes):
1 node ID; 2 average/maximum CPU and host memory
utilization rates; 3 average/maximum GPU and memory
utilization rates; 4 inbound/outbound traffic in bytes; 5
networked file storage IO in bytes.
• Node Specifications: 1 Node ID; 2 GPU model; 3
number of GPUs; 4 total memory and other hardware
specifications.
The italicized items are unique data points that are not
available in previous traces.

Job Running Time Limit. In SING, we limit job running
time to 24 hours during peak times, defined as when there
is a pending job queued for over an hour (other definitions
may apply here). Users requiring longer runtimes should use
checkpoints and resubmit their jobs. Experienced users can
automate this process for continuous execution.
This policy is also analogous to the way universities manage their public resources, similar to borrowing a library
book: you need to return it after a certain period, but you
can re-borrow if it is not reserved by someone else. The policy is in place to prevent excessively long or unattended jobs
and ensure fair allocation, particularly during peak periods.
5.3.2 Incidents Handling. We share lessons and recommendations from unexpected incidents.
Network File System Delay. We observed substantial delays and inconsistencies in the network file system during
peak periods of concurrent remote I/O, impacting job initialization and causing runtime errors. We addressed this
issue by switching to RDMA connections for the network
file system. Users are also advised to utilize collective communications directly over the network and avoid file synchronization during job execution.
System Configuration Lost Due to Hardware Upgrade.
While upgrading the physical network interface cards (NICs)
in SING, we encountered an issue due to the tight coupling
of the container’s PCI-E setting and specific NICs. When
we switched NICs, it triggered a failure that rendered the
container inoperable. We could not directly modify the PCI-E
setting inside of the container to use the new NIC because
the container was not able to start at all. In the end, we spent
about 3 days (as per Table 2) recreating the environment.

Software Stack. Our software stack includes the source code
and configuration scripts for the cluster workload manager,
scheduler, and monitoring tools. This includes:
• SING-cli and SING-service (§3.2) code and makefiles.
• Scheduler implementation (§3.3) as a Slurm plugin.
• Compute node (§3.4) configs (e.g., SR-IOV, GlusterFS).
Executor Backend Extension in Kubernetes Community. SING’s execution layer is designed to be extensible,
enabling support for new cluster managers, with Slurm as
the default. Recently, developers from DaoCloud [9], a leading Kubernetes contributor and software vendor, submitted
a merge request to SING’s open-source repository [12]. This
update adds support for job execution via Kubernetes and
ports the scheduler to use the Kubernetes API. The development was presented in a report at KubeCon 2024 [31], a Linux
Foundation community event, as a step toward integrating
cloud-native infrastructure with AI.

7

Limitations

SING’s design has the following known limitations:

6

SING Open Source

This paper represents our ongoing effort aimed at improving
the management of shared ML clusters in academic institutions. Since SING is currently deployed in a production
cluster, we are unable to fully explore all potential design
choices and optimization strategies.
To facilitate the research and operations of similar infrastructures, we provide SING’s source code, configurations,
and our cluster’s job traces as open-source resources [48].
Researchers interested in hands-on exploration of SING are
welcome to access our on-premise deployment hosted at [49].

Resource Isolation. Slurm isolates resources assigned to
different jobs on the same host using Linux cgroups [5]. We
currently depend on Slurm’s built-in mechanisms for isolating resources assigned to various jobs. For container-format
jobs, the container runtime is also invoked by Slurm within
this isolation mechanism. The performance and security implications—specifically, whether user resources are entirely
separated—require further research.
Connection Between SING-cli and SING-service. Currently, SING-cli establishes a connection to SING-service via
SSH to execute remote commands. The user’s SSH public

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

key is added to the host running SING-service, associated
with a new Linux user created during registration. While
this connection is secure, there remains a potential vulnerability where a malicious user could exploit it to execute
unauthorized commands on the SING-service host. Although
we have restricted user permissions on the host system to allow only specific operations (such as invoking SING-service),
a more secure approach would be to expose SING-service
functionalities through a secure API with authentications.
Port Forwarding for User Jobs. To enable users to access interactive services (e.g., TensorBoard) running within
their jobs, we employ port forwarding on the cluster gateway (§3.2). This approach exposes a port on the SING-service
host, which may allow unauthorized access if the service
lacks authentication. A more secure alternative is utilizing
SSH tunneling [45]. This method creates a secure tunnel
between the job host and the user’s local machine via the
gateway, restricting access exclusively to the user.
Cluster Failure. SING does not automatically recover from
cluster failures, such as node failures. When a node fails,
it and any associated user jobs become disconnected from
the cluster, and require manual recovery by the cluster operator. Consequently, the job loses progress (up to the last
checkpoint) and must be resubmitted.

Kaiqiang Xu et al.

requests in a first-come, first-served (FCFS) manner to ensure
equal access for any individual users.
ML System Optimizations. SING is extensible to leverage advancements in system optimizations for ML, such as
faster distributed storage [33] and more efficient networking [4, 53, 61]. These optimizations typically operate at layers
orthogonal to SING and can enhance ML job performance
transparently. Additionally, SING’s scheduling policies can
be extended to accommodate user-defined requirements or
job profiling information. This will enable SING to more effectively optimize job placement across heterogeneous nodes,
including those with specialized hardware (e.g., TPU [14]
and FPGA [19, 60]), as well as in geographically distributed
environments (§3.4).
Using Slurm as Executor Backend. Slurm, originally designed for MPI applications in scientific computing, is valued
for its simplicity and performance. While the MPI model has
gained less focus with the rise of big data and internet services, ML training jobs share system-level similarities with
MPI, leveraging advanced MPI techniques [25, 43]. As described in this paper, by adding ML workflow features to
Slurm, we leverage Slurm’s architecture and extend it to
manage shared ML clusters. Kubernetes can also serve as
the executor backend (§6).

9
8

Related Work and Discussion

We discuss the distributed frameworks and schedulers for
ML workloads. SING can extend with these capabilities, leveraging advancements in storage, networking, and hardware
for efficient, flexible cluster management.
Distributed Computing Frameworks. Distributed computing frameworks such as Ray [23] and Spark [59] perform
computations at a granular level, allowing them to parallelize
large jobs for efficient distributed execution. For example,
Ray employs an actor and task-based model for more precise
task management and asynchronous execution. These frameworks are integrated directly into user code, and submitted as
part of the user’s job to cluster managers. We note that these
frameworks can optionally operate in cluster mode [35, 44],
functioning similarly to cluster managers by managing and
allocating cluster resources to jobs. However, when running
in cluster mode, submitted jobs need to use their computation APIs. This approach differs from traditional cluster
managers like Slurm, Kubernetes, or SING, which allow users
to submit code using any programming framework.
Cluster Schedulers. Cluster schedulers for ML, including
the state-of-the-art Pollux [34] and Sia [47], focus on job
scheduling to improve cluster-wide performance such as
job completion time. These schedulers can be integrated
into cluster managers like Slurm, Kubernetes, and SING to
manage the entire ML job lifecycle. However, as discussed
in our scheduler design in §3.3, SING generally processes

Conclusion

This paper addresses the pressing challenges faced by universities worldwide in effectively managing shared GPU
clusters for ML research. Our experience with the design
and operation of SING, a campus ML cluster manager, offers
an operation-efficient solution, reducing the deployment and
maintenance burden on operations teams while achieving
high resource utilization and user satisfaction.

Acknowledgments
We thank our shepherd, Malte Schwarzkopf, and the anonymous reviewers from ASPLOS 2025, as well as reviewers
from our previous submissions, for their valuable feedback.
We also thank the Kubernetes community contributors, Peter Pan (@panpan0000) and Xiao Zhang (@wawa0210) from
DaoCloud [9], for their insightful discussions and valuable
contributions to the implementation of SING.
SING was developed, deployed, and operated on the TACC
cluster [49] at The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology. The statistics and analysis reported in this paper
are also based on SING’s deployment and operation on TACC.
An arXiv paper [56] detailing the TACC architecture, which
includes a bottom-up approach to efficient AI computing
with networking, frameworks, and algorithms, forms the
foundation and inspiration of this work.
This work is supported in part by the Hong Kong RGC
TRS T41-603/20R, GRF 16213621, NSFC 62062005, 62402407.
Kai Chen is the corresponding author.

Design and Operation of Shared Machine Learning Clusters on Campus

References
[1] Mohammad Alizadeh, Albert G. Greenberg, David A. Maltz, Jitendra
Padhye, Parveen Patel, Balaji Prabhakar, Sudipta Sengupta, and Murari
Sridharan. 2010. Data center TCP (DCTCP). In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2010 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures,
and Protocols for Computer Communications, New Delhi, India, August
30 -September 3, 2010. ACM, 63–74. https://doi.org/10.1145/1851182.
1851192
[2] Amazon Web Services 2024. Amazon Machine Images in Amazon EC2.
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from hhttps://docs.aws.amazon.com/
AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html
[3] Anaconda. 2024. User guide - conda documentation. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/userguide/index.html
[4] Wei Bai, Kai Chen, Hao Wang, Li Chen, Dongsu Han, and Chen Tian.
2015. Information-Agnostic Flow Scheduling for Commodity Data
Centers. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation, NSDI 15, Oakland, CA, USA, May 4-6, 2015. USENIX
Association, 455–468. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi15/
technical-sessions/presentation/bai
[5] Bill Brophy, Martin Perry, Moe Jette, Yiannis Georgiou, and Matthieu
Hautreux. 2014. Slurm Processes Isolation. Retrieved December 13,
2024 from https://slurm.schedmd.com/SUG14/process_isolation.pdf
[6] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot
Learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS
2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2020/hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html
[7] Kai Chen, Ankit Singla, Atul Singh, Kishore Ramachandran, Lei Xu,
Yueping Zhang, Xitao Wen, and Yan Chen. 2012. OSA: An Optical
Switching Architecture for Data Center Networks with Unprecedented
Flexibility. In Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2012, San Jose, CA, USA,
April 25-27, 2012. USENIX Association, 239–252. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/nsdi12/technical-sessions/presentation/chen_kai
[8] Containerd 2024. An industry-standard container runtime with an
emphasis on simplicity, robustness and portability. Retrieved December
13, 2024 from https://containerd.io/
[9] DaoCloud. 2024. https://github.com/daocloud.
[10] Docker. 2024. Dockerfile overview. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://docs.docker.com/build/concepts/dockerfile/
[11] Paul Edmon. 2022. Cluster Fragmentation. Retrieved December 13, 2024
from https://www.rc.fas.harvard.edu/blog/cluster-fragmentation/
[12] GitHub 2024. Github Pull Request: Submit kubernetes job without
changing tuxiv.conf format. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://github.com/turingaicloud/tcloud-sdk/pull/2
[13] GlusterFS. [n. d.]. Gluster Documentation. Retrieved December 13,
2024 from https://docs.gluster.org/en/main/
[14] Google. [n. d.]. Get started | Cloud TPU | Google Cloud. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/quick-starts
[15] Google Groups. 2022. What is an easy way to prevent users from running
programs on the master/login node. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://groups.google.com/g/slurm-users/c/HKMTjPQN9l0
[16] Raz Haleva. 2021. The Challenges of Sharing GPUs and How to Solve
Them. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://developer.hpe.com/
blog/the-challenges-of-sharing-gpus-and-how-to-solve-them/
[17] HAProxy 2024. HAProxy, The Reliable, High Performance TCP/HTTP
Load Balancer. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://www.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
haproxy.org/
[18] Qinghao Hu, Meng Zhang, Peng Sun, Yonggang Wen, and Tianwei
Zhang. 2023. Lucid: A Non-intrusive, Scalable and Interpretable
Scheduler for Deep Learning Training Jobs. In Proceedings of the
28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS 2023,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, March 25-29, 2023. ACM, 457–472. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3575693.3575705
[19] Qijing Huang, Dequan Wang, Zhen Dong, Yizhao Gao, Yaohui Cai, Tian
Li, Bichen Wu, Kurt Keutzer, and John Wawrzynek. 2021. CoDeNet: Efficient Deployment of Input-Adaptive Object Detection on Embedded
FPGAs. In FPGA ’21: The 2021 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium
on Field Programmable Gate Arrays, Virtual Event, USA, February 28 March 2, 2021. ACM, 206–216. https://doi.org/10.1145/3431920.3439295
[20] Hugging Face. 2024. Datasets - Hugging Face. Retrieved December 13,
2024 from https://huggingface.co/datasets?sort=most_rows
[21] Myeongjae Jeon, Shivaram Venkataraman, Amar Phanishayee, Junjie
Qian, Wencong Xiao, and Fan Yang. 2019. Analysis of Large-Scale
Multi-Tenant GPU Clusters for DNN Training Workloads. In Proceedings of the 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC
2019, Renton, WA, USA, July 10-12, 2019. USENIX Association, 947–960.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc19/presentation/jeon
[22] Microsoft 2024. Overview of Single Root I/O Virtualization (SRIOV). https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/
network/overview-of-single-root-i-o-virtualization--sr-iov-.
[23] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov,
Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul,
Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. 2018. Ray: A Distributed Framework
for Emerging AI Applications. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2018, Carlsbad, CA, USA,
October 8-10, 2018. USENIX Association, 561–577. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/osdi18/presentation/nishihara
[24] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar
Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Heterogeneity-Aware Cluster Scheduling Policies for Deep Learning Workloads. In 14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
OSDI 2020, Virtual Event, November 4-6, 2020. USENIX Association,
481–498. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/
narayanan-deepak
[25] NVIDIA 2020. Overview of NCCL - NCCL documentation. Retrieved
December 13, 2024 from https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/nccl/
user-guide/docs/overview.html
[26] NVIDIA 2024. About CUDA | NVIDIA Developer. Retrieved December
13, 2024 from https://developer.nvidia.com/about-cuda
[27] NVIDIA. 2024. Data Center Networking Concepts.
Retrieved
December 13, 2024 from https://docs.nvidia.com/networkingethernet-software/guides/EVPN-Network-Reference/Data-CenterNetworking-Concepts/
[28] NVIDIA 2024. NVIDIA Solutions for Higher Education and Research.
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
industries/higher-education-research/
[29] NVIDIA 2024. Single Root IO Virtualization (SR-IOV) - NVIDIA Docs. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/
display/mlnxofedv24010331/single+root+io+virtualization+(sr-iov)
[30] Michael Packard, Joe Stubbs, Justin A. Drake, and Christian Garcia.
2021. Real-World, Self-Hosted Kubernetes Experience. In PEARC ’21:
Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing, Boston, MA,
USA, July 18-22, 2021. ACM, 16:1–16:5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3437359.
3465603
[31] Peter Pan and Kaiqiang Xu. 2024. Breaking Boundaries: TACC as an
Unified Cloud-Native Infra for AI + HPC. Retrieved December 13,
2024 from https://www.classcentral.com/course/youtube-breakingboundaries-tacc-as-an-unified-cloud-native-infra-for-ai-hpc-peterpan-kaiqiang-xu-312983

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
[32] Princeton Research Computing. [n. d.]. Top 10 Mistakes to Avoid on the
Research Computing Clusters. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https:
//researchcomputing.princeton.edu/get-started/mistakes-avoid
[33] Yingjin Qian, Marc-André Vef, Patrick Farrell, Andreas Dilger, Xi
Li, Shuichi Ihara, Yinjin Fu, Wei Xue, and André Brinkmann. 2024.
Combining Buffered I/O and Direct I/O in Distributed File Systems. In
22nd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, FAST 2024,
Santa Clara, CA, USA, February 27-29, 2024. USENIX Association, 17–33.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast24/presentation/qian
[34] Aurick Qiao, Sang Keun Choe, Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Willie
Neiswanger, Qirong Ho, Hao Zhang, Gregory R. Ganger, and Eric P.
Xing. 2021. Pollux: Co-adaptive Cluster Scheduling for GoodputOptimized Deep Learning. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2021, July 14-16, 2021.
USENIX Association. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi21/
presentation/qiao
[35] Ray. [n. d.]. Ray Clusters Overview. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/getting-started.html
[36] Reddit 2021.
Research Group GPU Sharing: some opensource tool.
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https:
//www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/k07jn9/d_
research_group_gpu_sharing_some_opensource_tool/
What is the best way to manage GPU server
[37] Reddit 2022.
for multi-users?
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/ve987y/
d_what_is_the_best_way_to_manage_gpu_server_for/
[38] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser,
and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent
Diffusion Models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022.
IEEE, 10674–10685. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042
[39] Giovanni Rosa, Federico Zappone, Simone Scalabrino, and Rocco
Oliveto. 2024. Fixing Dockerfile smells: an empirical study. Empir.
Softw. Eng. 29, 5 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-024-10471-7
[40] Run:ai 2024. Simplify GPU Sharing in Multi-GPU Environments. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://www.run.ai/guides/multigpu/simplify-gpu-sharing-part-1
[41] SchedMD 2021. Slurm Workload Manager - Overview. Retrieved
December 13, 2024 from https://slurm.schedmd.com/overview.html
[42] SchedMD 2024. Slurm Workload Manager - strigger. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://slurm.schedmd.com/strigger.html
[43] Alexander Sergeev and Mike Del Balso. 2018. Horovod: fast and easy
distributed deep learning in TensorFlow. CoRR abs/1802.05799 (2018).
arXiv:1802.05799 http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05799
[44] Spark. [n. d.]. Spark - Cluster Mode Overview. Retrieved December 13,
2024 from https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/cluster-overview.html
[45] SSH Academy [n. d.]. SSH Tunneling: Client Command and Server
Configuration. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://www.ssh.
com/academy/ssh/tunneling-example
[46] Stanford Research Computing Center. 2024. Running Jobs - Sherlock.
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://www.sherlock.stanford.edu/
docs/user-guide/running-jobs/
[47] Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Daiyaan Arfeen, Shouxu Lin, Aurick
Qiao, Zhihao Jia, and Gregory R. Ganger. 2023. Sia: Heterogeneityaware, goodput-optimized ML-cluster scheduling. In Proceedings of the
29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2023, Koblenz,
Germany, October 23-26, 2023. ACM, 642–657. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3600006.3613175
[48] TACC Authors. 2024. Open Source Artifacts: TACC. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://tacc.ust.hk/#opensource
[49] TACC Authors. 2024. Scalable AI Infrastructure Designed for Evolving
Machine Learning Research. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https:
//tacc.ust.hk/
[50] The Kubernetes Authors 2024. Overview | Kubernetes. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/

Kaiqiang Xu et al.
[51] Vladimir Vondrus. 2022. Zero-waste single-pass packing of power-of-two
textures — blog.magnum.graphics. Retrieved December 13, 2024 from
https://blog.magnum.graphics/backstage/pot-array-packing/
[52] Hao Wang, Han Tian, Jingrong Chen, Xinchen Wan, Jiacheng Xia,
Gaoxiong Zeng, Wei Bai, Junchen Jiang, Yong Wang, and Kai Chen.
2024. Towards Domain-Specific Network Transport for Distributed
DNN Training. In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2024, Santa Clara, CA, April 15-17, 2024.
USENIX Association. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi24/
presentation/wang-hao
[53] Zilong Wang, Layong Luo, Qingsong Ning, Chaoliang Zeng, Wenxue Li,
Xinchen Wan, Peng Xie, Tao Feng, Ke Cheng, Xiongfei Geng, Tianhao
Wang, Weicheng Ling, Kejia Huo, Pingbo An, Kui Ji, Shideng Zhang,
Bin Xu, Ruiqing Feng, Tao Ding, Kai Chen, and Chuanxiong Guo.
2023. SRNIC: A Scalable Architecture for RDMA NICs. In 20th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI
2023, Boston, MA, April 17-19, 2023. USENIX Association, 1–14. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/wang-zilong
[54] Ahuva Mu’alem Weil and Dror G. Feitelson. 2001. Utilization, Predictability, Workloads, and User Runtime Estimates in Scheduling the
IBM SP2 with Backfilling. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst. 12, 6
(2001), 529–543. https://doi.org/10.1109/71.932708
[55] Qizhen Weng, Wencong Xiao, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang, Cheng Wang,
Jian He, Yong Li, Liping Zhang, Wei Lin, and Yu Ding. 2022. MLaaS
in the Wild: Workload Analysis and Scheduling in Large-Scale Heterogeneous GPU Clusters. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2022, Renton, WA, USA, April
4-6, 2022. USENIX Association, 945–960. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/nsdi22/presentation/weng
[56] Kaiqiang Xu, Xinchen Wan, Hao Wang, Zhenghang Ren, Xudong Liao,
Decang Sun, Chaoliang Zeng, and Kai Chen. 2021. TACC: A Full-stack
Cloud Computing Infrastructure for Machine Learning Tasks. CoRR
abs/2110.01556 (2021). arXiv:2110.01556 https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
01556
[57] Jie You, Jae-Won Chung, and Mosharaf Chowdhury. 2023. Zeus: Understanding and Optimizing GPU Energy Consumption of DNN Training. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation, NSDI 2023, Boston, MA, April 17-19, 2023. USENIX
Association, 119–139. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/
presentation/you
[58] Yushan. 2024.
Managing Multiple CUDA + cuDNN Installations.
Retrieved December 13, 2024 from https:
//medium.com/@yushantripleseven/managing-multiple-cudacudnn-installations-ba9cdc5e2654
[59] Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Tathagata Das, Ankur Dave,
Justin Ma, Murphy McCauly, Michael J. Franklin, Scott Shenker, and
Ion Stoica. 2012. Resilient Distributed Datasets: A Fault-Tolerant Abstraction for In-Memory Cluster Computing. In Proceedings of the 9th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation,
NSDI 2012, San Jose, CA, USA, April 25-27, 2012. USENIX Association, 15–28. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi12/technicalsessions/presentation/zaharia
[60] Junxue Zhang, Xiaodian Cheng, Wei Wang, Liu Yang, Jinbin Hu, and
Kai Chen. 2023. FLASH: Towards a High-performance Hardware
Acceleration Architecture for Cross-silo Federated Learning. In 20th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation,
NSDI 2023, Boston, MA, April 17-19, 2023. USENIX Association, 1057–
1079. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/zhangjunxue
[61] Junxue Zhang, Chaoliang Zeng, Hong Zhang, Shuihai Hu, and Kai
Chen. 2022. LiteFlow: towards high-performance adaptive neural
networks for kernel datapath. In SIGCOMM ’22: ACM SIGCOMM 2022
Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, August 22 - 26, 2022. ACM,
414–427. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544229

