Manta: Hybrid-Sensitive Type Inference Toward
Type-Assisted Bug Detection for Stripped Binaries
Chengfeng Ye

Yuandao Cai∗

Anshunkang Zhou

cyeaa@cse.ust.hk
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
China

ycaibb@cse.ust.hk
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
China

azhouad@cse.ust.hk
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
China

Heqing Huang

Hao Ling

Charles Zhang

heqhuang@cityu.edu.hk
City University of Hong Kong
China

hlingab@cse.ust.hk
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
China

charlesz@cse.ust.hk
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
China

Abstract
Static binary bug detection has been a prominent approach
for ensuring the security of binaries used in our daily lives.
However, the type information lost in binaries prevents the
improvement opportunity for a static analyzer to utilize type
information to prune away infeasible facts and increase analysis precision. To make binary bug detection more practical
with higher precision, in this work, we propose the first
hybrid-sensitive type inference, Manta, that combines dataflow analysis with different sensitivities to complement each
other and infer precise types for many variables. The inferred
types are then used to assist with bug detection by pruning
infeasible indirect call targets and data dependencies. Our
experiments indicate Manta outperforms prior work by inferring types with 78.7% precision and 97.2% recall. Based
on the inferred types, we can prune away 63.9% more infeasible indirect-call targets compared to existing type analysis
techniques and perform program slicing on binaries with
61.1% similarity to that on source code. Moreover, Manta
has led to 86 new developer-confirmed vulnerabilities in
many popular IoT firmware, with 64 CVE/PSV IDs assigned.
ACM Reference Format:
Chengfeng Ye, Yuandao Cai, Anshunkang Zhou, Heqing Huang,
Hao Ling, and Charles Zhang. 2024. Manta: Hybrid-Sensitive Type
∗ Corresponding author.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674177

Inference Toward Type-Assisted Bug Detection for Stripped Binaries. In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674177

1

Introduction

Static binary analysis is one of the most powerful techniques
for security analysis, which has been widely used in binaryonly scenarios, such as detecting vulnerabilities in embedded
firmware [15, 64, 81], and industrial control systems [62]. Despite its usefulness, existing binary-level static bug detection
tools still suffer from the problem of low precision. Existing studies [52, 54] have revealed that the main reason for
this precision gap is the loss of type information in binaries.
Type information has been widely utilized to filter infeasible targets in both indirect call analysis [8, 53] and data
dependency analysis [11, 25, 54, 66]. However, the types lost
during compilation prevent the opportunities to utilize type
information to build a better bug-detection tool for binaries.
To make type-assisted binary static analysis possible, in this
paper, we explore applying type inference to recover variable
types in stripped binaries with high precision and recall to
assist with static bug detection in binaries.
Problem. Despite binary type inference being a fundamental topic with long-term development, existing techniques still have the following limitations. That is, they either
(i) produce an over-approximated type inference result or (ii)
infer unknown types for many variables. As a result, the inferred types cannot effectively be utilized to assist with static
binary analysis.
Specifically, on the one hand, a low-precision type inference, such as flow-insensitive or context-insensitive analysis [26, 45, 57], would indiscriminately collect and unify
all possible type hints to infer each variable’s type. Since
the collected type hints could correspond to many variables
of different types, the inferred type for each single variable

