M5: Mastering Page Migration and Memory
Management for CXL-based Tiered Memory Systems
Yan Sun

Jongyul Kim

Zeduo Yu

Jiyuan Zhang

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
yans3@illinois.edu

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
jyk@illinois.edu

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
zeduoyu2@illinois.edu

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
jiyuanz3@illinois.edu

Hwayong Nam

Jaehyun Park

Siyuan Chai

Michael Jaemin Kim

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
siyuanc3@illinois.edu

Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
michael604@scale.snu.ac.kr

Eojin Na

Yifan Yuan

Ren Wang

Jung Ho Ahn

Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
eojin.na@scale.snu.ac.kr

Intel Labs
Hillsboro, U.S.A.
yifan.yuan@intel.com

Intel Labs
Hillsboro, U.S.A.
ren.wang@intel.com

Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
gajh@snu.ac.kr

Seoul National University
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Seoul, Republic of Korea
hwayong.nam@scale.snu.ac.kr jhpark@scale.snu.ac.kr

Tianyin Xu

Nam Sung Kim

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
tyxu@illinois.edu

University of Illinois
Urbana, U.S.A.
nskim@illinois.edu

Abstract

Besides, this work demonstrates that the performance overhead of identifying hot pages is sometimes high enough to
degrade application performance. Lastly, this work presents
M5, a platform designed to facilitate the development of
effective CXL-driven page-migration solutions, providing
hardware-based hot-page and hot-word trackers in the CXL
controller. On average, M5 can identify 47% hotter pages
and offer 14% higher performance than the best CPU-driven
page-migration solution, even with a simple policy.

CXL has emerged as a promising memory interface that can
cost-effectively expand the capacity and bandwidth of a memory system, complementing the traditional DDR interface.
However, CXL DRAM presents 2–3× longer access latency
than DDR DRAM, forming a tiered-memory system that demands an effective and efficient page-migration solution. Although many page-migration solutions have been proposed
for past tiered-memory systems, they have achieved limited
success. To tackle the challenge of managing tiered-memory
systems, this work first presents a CXL-driven profiling solution to precisely and transparently count the number of
accesses to every 4KB page and 64B word in CXL DRAM.
Second, using the profiling solution, this work uncovers that
(1) widely used CPU-driven page-migration solutions often
identify warm pages as hot pages, and (2) certain applications have sparse hot pages, where only a small percentage
of words in each of these pages are frequently accessed.

CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Memory and dense storage; Hardware accelerators; • Computer systems organization → Architectures.
Keywords: Compute Express Link, DRAM, Tiered Memory,
Near Memory Processing, Page Migration
ACM Reference Format:
Yan Sun, Jongyul Kim, Zeduo Yu, Jiyuan Zhang, Siyuan Chai, Michael
Jaemin Kim, Hwayong Nam, Jaehyun Park, Eojin Na, Yifan Yuan,
Ren Wang, Jung Ho Ahn, Tianyin Xu, and Nam Sung Kim. 2025.
M5: Mastering Page Migration and Memory Management for CXLbased Tiered Memory Systems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March
30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3711999

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3711999

1

Introduction

As datacenter applications continue to evolve, they demand
DRAM with larger capacity and higher bandwidth. However, it has become more challenging to meet these demands

604

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

cost-efficiently, as the current DRAM and its DDR interface technologies have almost reached their scaling limits.
Consequently, it has taken 4 and 7 years to double the perchip capacity of mainstream DRAM (from 8Gb to 16Gb [70])
and the bandwidth of the DDR interface (from 19.2GB/s to
38.4GB/s [64]), respectively. In such a case, the number of
memory channels determines both the capacity and bandwidth of a memory system. Yet, a large number of pins is
required for each memory channel (e.g., 288 pins for the
DDR4/5 interfaces), limiting the number of memory channels in a system under various physical constraints imposed
by the CPU package and the PCB board.
Compute Express Link (CXL) [58] built on PCIe has emerged
as a promising alternative memory interface, addressing the
aforementioned challenges. For example, CXL built on PCIe
5.0 can offer the same bandwidth as DDR5 with 3× fewer
pins [62, 66]. Furthermore, the host CPU can access CXL
memory with load/store instructions, as the CXL protocol
can expose the CXL memory as memory in a remote NUMA
node. Nonetheless, a serial interface and the CXL protocol
together increase the latency of accessing CXL DRAM by
140–170𝑛𝑠 compared to DDR DRAM [62]. Therefore, CXL
DRAM is considered slow memory, forming a tiered-memory
system when used alongside fast memory (e.g., DDR DRAM).
To minimize the performance penalty of frequently accessing
CXL DRAM, a page-migration solution is essential.
A page-migration solution periodically determines frequently accessed (hot) pages in slow memory and then migrates them to fast memory. It has been extensively studied whenever a new memory architecture and/or technology presenting non-uniform memory access latency has
emerged. For instance, a NUMA system experiences a performance penalty whenever a CPU accesses DRAM in a remote
NUMA node. To reduce the performance penalty, a pagemigration solution, i.e., Automatic NUMA Balancing (ANB),
was introduced, exploiting hinting page faults to identify hot
pages [5]. Later, other page-migration solutions have been
proposed to efficiently use emerging memory, such as Intel
3D XPoint, which presents 3× longer access latency than
DDR4 DRAM [31, 48, 53, 68, 69].
These page-migration solutions are based on causing hinting page faults (e.g., TPP [42]), scanning Page-Table Entries
(PTEs) (e.g., DAMON [48]), or sampling accessed memory addresses (e.g., Memtis [31]). However, it has been technically
challenging to precisely determine whether pages identified
by them are truly hot. Furthermore, a large body of work
has suggested that a significant percentage of 64B words in
each 4KB page are not accessed at all for a certain class of
applications (e.g., [2, 8, 52]). We refer to such a page as a
sparse page in this work. When sparse pages are migrated,
they are first brought into the cache hierarchy, which causes
cache pollution. Therefore, it may be less desirable to migrate
sparse pages, depending on the characteristics of applications. Nonetheless, the CPU-driven page-migration solutions

605

lack the capability of distinguishing between sparse and
dense pages.
The rise of CXL memory has brought renewed attention to
the importance of effective page-migration solutions. Unlike
the previous memory technologies, including DDR DRAM
and 3D XPoint, CXL employs a third-party controller. This
offers unprecedented flexibility, facilitating easy integration
of hardware functions between the host CPU and CXL memory. Exploiting such flexibility of CXL memory, this work
makes the following contributions.
Contribution 1: A CXL-driven hot-page and hot-word
profiling solution (§3). To assist with the development
of page-migration solutions for CXL-based tiered-memory
systems, we present Page Access Counter (PAC) and Word
Access Counter (WAC), implemented in an FPGA-based CXL
device. They exploit the near-memory processing capability
of the CXL controller to count the number of accesses to
every 4KB page and 64B word, respectively, in CXL DRAM.
As such, they can provide a more precise and transparent
profiling capability than other methodologies, such as dynamic binary instrumentation, simulation/emulation, and
address sampling.
Contribution 2: CPU-driven page-migration solutions
considered harmful (§4). Using PAC, we demonstrate that
two representative CPU-driven page-migration solutions
(ANB and DAMON) often identify warm pages in popular
memory-intensive applications. Specifically, the number of
accesses to hot pages identified by ANB and DAMON is only
21% and 29%, respectively, of the number of accesses to the
same number of hot pages determined by PAC. Besides, using
WAC, we confirm that these page-migration solutions often
migrate sparse pages. For instance, we discover that only 16
or fewer words out of 64 words in a page are accessed in 86%
of the pages allocated by Redis [54]. Meanwhile, we observe
that the performance overhead of identifying hot pages and
migrating them is high. That is, unless true hot, dense pages
are identified and migrated, application performance may
degrade instead. This necessitates a page-migration solution
that can identify true hot pages and distinguish between
dense and sparse hot pages, while minimizing the performance overhead of identifying them.
Contribution 3: A platform for developing CXL-driven
page-migration solutions (§5). To address the shortcomings of the CPU-driven page-migration solutions, we advocate for a CXL-driven page-migration solution with the
following capabilities. First, it should delegate CPU-intensive
operations for identifying hot pages to the CXL controller.
Second, it should eschew the migration of sparse pages if
necessary. In this work, we provide such capabilities with M5
(Mastering Page Migration and Memory Management for
CXL-based Tiered Memory Systems), a platform designed
to facilitate the development of such a CXL-driven pagemigration solution. M5 consists of the following two key
components: (1) Hot-Page Tracker (HPT) and Hot-Word

2

CXL IP

Tx

CXL.cache
/CXL.mem

PCIe/
CXL.io

AXI-MM

Background

2.1 CPU-driven Page Migration Solutions
To identify hot pages, past page-migration solutions rely
on (1) causing hinting page faults [5, 26, 42, 65], (2) scanning PTEs [4, 7, 15, 18, 41, 46, 48, 55, 68], or (3) sampling
accessed memory addresses [15, 31, 53]. They are effective
for certain applications but are also known to incur a notable
performance overhead [32, 42, 46].
Solution 1: Causing hinting page faults. It periodically
samples a certain number of pages (e.g., 64K pages) in slow
memory, resets the present bit in the PTE of each sampled
page, and invalidates the corresponding TLB entries across
all CPU cores to unmap the corresponding pages. If such
pages are accessed later, soft page faults will occur, and the
OS will migrate them to fast memory. TPP is the latest pagemigration solution that determines hot pages based on such
a mechanism. However, it consumes a significant number
of CPU cycles for accessing the PTEs of sampled pages, invalidating TLB entries, and handling page faults, especially
degrading the performance of latency-sensitive applications
such as Redis [62].
Solution 2: Scanning PTEs. It periodically scans every
valid PTE associated with pages in slow memory. At a given
epoch, it checks whether the access bit of each PTE is set
or not. If it detects that the access bit was set, it increments
the access count associated with the page and resets the access bit. Note that the access bit can be set again only if an
access to the page incurs a TLB miss later, necessitating the
invalidation of the corresponding TLB entry at some point.
Unlike Solution 1, it passively invalidates TLB entries, depending on architectural events, such as TLB conflict misses
and context switching. To determine whether the page is hot
or not, it needs to accumulate the access count over multiple
epochs, each consuming a large number of CPU cycles to
scan all PTEs. Lastly, since the access bit is a Boolean value,
capturing only one access in a given epoch, regardless of
the number of accesses to the page, it cannot determine the
precise number of accesses to the page.
Solution 3: Sampling accessed memory addresses. It harnesses the modern CPU’s capability to sample architectural
events, e.g., Processor Event-Based Sampling (PEBS) in Intel
CPUs [20] to determine hot pages [15, 31, 53]. Specifically,
it samples LLC miss addresses at a specified frequency (e.g.,

user-defined

4 MC

DCOH slice
cache/mem
request
handler
Device $

CXL.io
core
logic

AVMM

AFU

Coherent
request AFU
CSR/MMIO
space

Memory device

CXL link/
transaction
layers
3

Coherent
mem AFU I/F

1
Rx

Flex Bus Physical Layer (PHY)

2

DDR Ch 0

Tracker (HWT) and (2) M5-manager. HPT and HWT costeffectively track the top-𝐾 hot pages and hot words, respectively. M5-manager provides users with software interfaces
for the synergistic use of HPT and HWT, empowering them
to develop diverse policies for intelligently identifying pages
to migrate. On average, M5 can identify 47% hotter pages
and offer 20% and 14% higher performance than ANB and
DAMON, respectively, for memory-intensive applications,
even with a simple policy.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Memory
controller

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

ECC
CXL Controller

Figure 1. Overview of a CXL controller architecture implemented in Intel Agilex FPGA devices.
once every 1,000 LLC misses) and stores them in the PEBS
buffer. When the PEBS buffer is full, an interrupt is triggered,
and the sampled addresses in the PEBS buffer are processed
and analyzed by the CPU to identify hot pages. It may determine the number of accesses to pages more precisely than
Solutions 1 and 2. Yet, it may lack preciseness in identifying
hot pages because it does not capture all the addresses. Furthermore, it incurs a higher performance overhead to more
precisely identify hot pages, as a higher sampling frequency
interrupts the CPU more frequently to process the sampled
addresses in the PEBS buffer. Lastly, at the moment, the PEBS
on the Intel CPU does not support sampling LLC misses to
CXL memory [67].
2.2 CXL Memory
CXL device types. Built on the physical layer of PCIe, CXL
defines three device types: CXL Types 1, 2, and 3, each with
a distinct composition of three protocols: CXL.io, CXL.cache,
and CXL.mem. CXL.io is the common protocol for all three
types of CXL devices to initialize the interface between a
host CPU and a CXL device [14]. CXL.cache facilitates device
cache and cache-coherent Device-to-Host (D2H) memory
accesses for CXL Type-1 and Type-2 devices. The device can
access the entire host memory space in a cache-coherent
manner. CXL.mem supports device memory and Host-toDevice (H2D) and Device-to-Device (D2D) memory accesses
for CXL Type-2 and Type-3 devices. Since the host CPU can
access the entire device memory space, we can use both CXL
Type-2 and Type-3 devices as memory capacity/bandwidth
expanders that serve as slow memory in a tiered-memory
system.
CXL controller architecture. Figure 1 depicts a CXL controller architecture implemented in Intel Agilex FPGA devices. It consists of 1 PCIe physical layer, 2 CXL link layer,
3 CXL transaction layer, and 4 memory controller (MC) IPs.
2 and 3 implement the CXL.cache and/or CXL.mem protocol functions, depending on a desired device type. Between
3 and 4 , we may implement diverse near-memory hardware functions in the Accelerated Function Unit (AFU) and

606

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

user-defined

DCOH

CXL-IP

Memory access
2

Snoop
PAC
PFN

CXL.io core logic

MC

Cnt.

WAC

1
Address to
PFN/Word
Converter

Word Cnt.

4MB SRAM

CSR/MMIO
space

4MB SRAM
4MB SRAM 2

Memory controller

the Coherent request AFU (CAFU). The AFU can snoop and
manipulate not only addresses from the host CPU to device
memory but also data from the host CPU or the MC. Additionally, it can independently issue non-cache-coherent D2D
memory access requests to the device memory. CXL.cache
accompanies one or more instances of the Device Coherence
Engine (DCOH), each including device cache and serving
D2H and H2D memory accesses from the CAFU and the host
CPU, respectively, in a cache-coherent manner. 2 and 3
are collectively referred to as CXL IP in this work.

Miscellaneous
3

CXL Controller

3

CXL-driven Page and Word Access
Counting

Figure 2. Page Access Counter (PAC) and Word Access
Counter (WAC) in a CXL controller.

Limitations of current approaches. It has been challenging to precisely determine the number of accesses to every
page and word in DRAM with commodity systems. For example, Intel PEBS can sample only one address out of a hundred at most. A dynamic binary instrumentation using Intel
Pin [24] can capture every memory access address, but it requires notable effort to precisely determine DRAM access addresses, especially when other applications co-run and cause
interference at L2 cache and LLC. As such, it has been elusive
to assess whether pages identified by past page-migration
solutions are truly hot pages and how many words in such
pages are accessed or not in commodity systems. Meanwhile,
the emergence of a commodity FPGA-based CXL device has
opened up an unprecedented opportunity to tackle such a
challenge. In this section, we first describe page and word
access counting functions (PAC and WAC) in the CXL controller of such a device. PAC and WAC exploit the inherent
capability of near-memory processing in a CXL controller
to precisely count the number of accesses to every page
and word in CXL memory. Subsequently, we describe software support to use PAC and WAC as a complete profiling
solution.
Hardware. In this section, we assume that a system supports
a 48-bit Physical Address (PA) space, and the OS manages
memory in 4KB page granularity, except when specifically
allocating 2MB or 1GB huge pages. Then DRAM is accessed
with PA[47:6] because the access granularity of DRAM is 64B
(i.e., the size of a cache line), and the Page Frame Number
(PFN) of a 4KB page is identified by PA[47:12]. Figure 2
depicts the hardware architecture of PAC and WAC based on
these assumptions. The PAC hardware consists of three key
components. 1 An address-to-PFN converter snoops every
memory access address (PA[47:6]) from the CXL IP (Figure 13 ) to the MCs (Figure 1- 4 ), and right-shifts the address by 6
bits to obtain the PFN. 2 An SRAM unit provides a capacity
of 4MB, with each entry storing an 𝐿-bit access count for a
4KB page. 3 Miscellaneous logic comprises an 𝐿-bit adder, a
controller, and configuration/control registers. Lastly, WAC
has the same hardware architecture as PAC, but it does not
convert a given address to a PFN. Note that PAC and WAC

fundamentally differ from event sampling-based approaches
such as PEBS since PAC and WAC track every DRAM access
address.
The SRAM unit is indexed by the PFN from the addressto-PFN converter. For a given PFN, the controller gets the
corresponding access count from the SRAM unit, increments
it using the adder, and then stores it back to the SRAM unit.
An overflow may happen when 𝐿 is small. However, for
example, a 16-bit access count saturates only after ∼20𝑠,
even for memory-intensive applications in our experiments.
Nonetheless, PAC may reset saturated counters after accumulating them into the corresponding 64-bit counters stored
in the access-count table allocated in a host or device
memory region using D2H or D2D memory accesses. After
completing the execution of a given workload, the host CPU
can obtain the precise number of accesses to each page from
the access-count table. The SRAM unit is exposed to the host
CPU as an MMIO region, allowing PAC software to directly
access the access counts.
Software. The software interface for PAC and WAC first
maps the SRAM units and configuration/control registers
to an MMIO region. Then, it can access the access counts
through the MMIO interface over CXL.io. However, since
the size of an MMIO region is limited to 2MB, we use a
1MB region to access the access counts in the SRAM unit
and the remaining 1MB region to access configuration and
control registers. To access 4MB of the access counts with a
1MB region, we design PAC and WAC hardware functions to
use a configuration register to store a base address for each
1MB region of the SRAM unit and access the access counts
with the base address plus an offset given by PAC and WAC
software interfaces. Therefore, by changing the base address
in the configuration register through the MMIO interface, it
can access all access counts.
Scalability. When the SRAM unit in the CXL controller
is not large enough to store all access counts for a given
CXL DRAM capacity, we may take one of the following
approaches. First, we adapt the SRAM unit as a cache to
store a subset of counters. When a cache miss occurs, the

607

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

controller chooses a counter to evict, writes the count to
the corresponding counter in the access-count table using
a D2H or D2D memory access, and then writes 1 to the
counter in the SRAM unit. Second, we may limit the size
of the CXL memory region that PAC or WAC monitors at
a time by setting a configuration register that specifies the
memory address range. Then, we monitor either (1) all CXL
memory regions over multiple intervals during a single run
or (2) only one CXL memory region during a single run and
repeat it for different CXL memory regions over multiple
runs. In this work, WAC monitor a 128MB memory region
at a time, where each word address maps to a 4-bit counter
in the SRAM array.

4

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
ANB

Access count ratio

1

DAMON

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
mean

redis

roms

mcf

foto.

cactu.

tc

sssp

pr

cc

bfs

bc

lib.

0

Figure 3. Average access-count ratio of hot pages identified
by ANB and DAMON.

take a PFN from the hot-page list, determine the number of
accesses to the page corresponding to the PFN by looking
up the access-count table with the PFN, accumulate it into
k_access_count, and repeat this for every PFN in the hotpage list. (S5) We also find the top-𝐾 hot pages from the
access-count table, determine the accumulated number of
accesses to these pages, and store it in top_k_access_count.
Then, we divide k_access_count by top_k_access_count
to get an average access-count ratio, which serves as a metric
to evaluate how precisely a given page-migration solution
identifies true hot pages.
Figure 3 plots the average access-count ratio of hot pages
identified by ANB and DAMON. For this experiment, we
run twelve popular memory-intensive benchmarks. See §6
for detailed information on the setup and these benchmarks.
We set 𝐾 to be up to 128K pages (i.e., 512MB) corresponding
to roughly 1/16 of the memory footprint of all benchmarks
above. We collect up to 128K hot pages identified by these
solutions and record the number of accesses to every page.
We repeat the measurement above at 10 different random
execution points. A vertical line across a bar in Figure 3
represents the minimum and maximum values of the average access-count ratio across 10 execution points. This
is to evaluate the preciseness of the hot pages determined
by these solutions at various execution phases. Except for
cactuBSSN_r, fotonik3d_r, and mcf_r, we find that both
solutions give the access-count ratio below 0.4 on average.
That is, the hot pages identified by ANB and DAMON are
not as hot as the top-𝐾 hot pages. Overall, DAMON offers
higher average access-count ratios than ANB.

Usefulness and Cost of CPU-driven Page
Migration Solutions

In this section, we first use PAC to evaluate how precisely
CPU-driven page-migration solutions, ANB and DAMON determine true hot pages. We choose the latest version of ANB
over TPP because TPP has some known problems [63] that
we have also experienced, whereas ANB has improved over
the years. Also, we do not evaluate Memtis, a representative
sampling-based page-migration solution, because the Intel
CPU lacks PEBS support for CXL devices and, consequently,
cannot correctly run Memtis at the moment [67]. Second, we
assess how many words in those pages are accessed, using
WAC. Lastly, we evaluate the performance cost of identifying hot pages. Note that these analyses are not intended to
provide comprehensive evaluations of the effectiveness of
these solutions across a wide range of memory-intensive applications. Instead, they are meant to demonstrate the utility
of PAC and WAC as a profiling solution for developing and
optimizing page-migration solutions.
4.1 Usefulness of Identified Hot Pages
In this section, we obtain the access counts of 𝐾 hot pages
identified by ANB and DAMON by looking up PAC’s accesscount table with the PFNs of these pages. We then compare
these access counts to those of the top-𝐾 hot pages determined by PAC. Lastly, we evaluate the access sparsity of
pages using WAC.
Access count. Using PAC, we first evaluate the hotness of
pages determined by ANB and DAMON with the following
steps. (S1) We modify ANB and DAMON to store the PFNs
of identified hot pages into a hot-page list but not to migrate
these pages. (S2) We execute a given benchmark with a pagemigration solution after using Linux cgroup to allocate all
the pages of the benchmark to CXL DRAM. This makes every
DRAM access from the benchmark served by CXL DRAM.
(S3) During the execution, the page-migration solution stores
the PFNs of identified hot pages in the hot-page list, while
PAC records the number of accesses to every page in the
access-count table, respectively. (S4) After the execution, we

Observation 1: CPU-driven page-migration solutions often
identify warm pages as hot pages.
Access sparsity. The page-migration solutions migrate an
entire page from slow memory to fast memory, regardless of
whether only a few or all words in the page are hot. Meanwhile, only a small number of words in a page can be frequently accessed. In other words, such a sparse page can
be identified as a hot page because of a few very hot words.
However, when the host CPU migrates such sparse pages, it
not only wastes the capacity of fast memory but also pollutes
the cache hierarchy. Therefore, if there coexist sparse and

608

8

16

32

foto.

4

1

cactu
.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

48

of CPU cycles consumed by the Linux kernel by up to 487%
and 733% (with an average of 159% and 277% across the
benchmarks), respectively. This is because scanning a large
number of PTEs (DAMON), invalidating TLBs (ANB), and
handling soft page faults (ANB) consumes a large number
of CPU cycles (§2.1). This significant increase in CPU cycles
consumed by ANB and DAMON can disturb the execution
of applications running on the same CPU core. For example,
ANB and DAMON increase the 99th -percentile (p99) latency
of Redis, a representative latency-sensitive application, by
34% and 39%, respectively. The increase in execution time of
best-effort applications is also notable. For instance, ANB and
DAMON increase the execution time by up to 4.6% (SSSP)
and 8.6% (Liblinear), respectively. Note that recent work
has reported that even sampling-based page migration solutions can also considerably degrade application performance
when the sampling rate is high to achieve high precision in
identifying hot pages (e.g., more than 15% when sampling
one every 100 LLC miss addresses [75]).

CDF

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
redis

mcd

c.-lib

mcf

roms

tc

pr

sssp

cc

bfs

bc

lib.

0

Figure 4. Probability of a 4K page where at most 𝑁 unique
64B words are accessed. mcd and c.-lib are abbreviations
for Memcached and CacheLib, respectively.
dense hot pages, migrating dense hot pages can be more
beneficial than migrating sparse hot pages. However, the
current page-migration solutions lack the ability to distinguish between sparse and dense hot pages. This inspires us
to leverage WAC and investigate the access sparsity of pages
in memory-intensive applications.
Figure 4 plots the probability of a 4K page where at most
4, 8, 16, 32, and 48 unique 64B words (6.25%, 12.5%, 25%, 50%,
and 75% of words in a page) are accessed. This shows that
the likelihood of a page having 25% or fewer of its unique
words accessed is 86%, 76%, and 74% for Redis, Memcached,
and CacheLib, respectively. That is, most pages in these
benchmarks are sparsely accessed. In contrast, the pages
in the SPEC CPU 2017 benchmarks, except for roms_r, are
densely accessed, as the probability of a page with at least
75% of its words accessed is 87% to 92%. The GAP benchmark
suite exhibits greater variance across benchmarks in the
probability of sparse pages. The pages in PageRank and SSSP
are mostly densely accessed, with the probability of a page
having at least 75% of its words accessed being 98% and
89%, respectively. In contrast, Liblinear, BC, BFS, CC, and
TC present notable access sparsity, with the probability of a
page with at most 25% of words accessed being 15%, 4%, 17%,
20%, and 12%, respectively.

Observation 3: The performance overhead of identifying
hot pages is notable enough to potentially degrade application performance if the benefit do not compensate for the
overhead.

5

M5: Track, Filter, and Migrate

Observation 2: A large percentage of pages in certain
applications can be sparsely accessed.

In this section, to facilitate the development of effective CXLdriven page-migration solutions, we present M5, consisting
of two components: (1) Hot Page Tracker (HPT) and Hot
Word Tracker (HWT) and (2) M5-manager. HPT and HWT,
inspired by hardware-based Row-Hammer (RH) defense solutions, cost-efficiently track the top-𝐾 hot pages and words,
respectively. HPT and HWT can eliminate the high performance overhead of identifying hot pages and introduce the
ability to determine sparse hot words, respectively, which the
CPU-driven page-migration solutions lack. M5-manager provides software interfaces to HPT and HWT, allowing users to
explore diverse policies for their CXL-driven page-migration
solutions.

4.2 Performance Cost of Identifying Hot Pages
To identify hot pages, CPU-driven page-migration solutions
perform expensive operations (§2.1). When such expensive
operations are performed periodically and frequently, they
can interfere with application execution, incurring a notable
performance penalty, especially for latency-sensitive applications. In this section, to quantify the performance overhead
of identifying hot pages, we pin all Linux kernel processes,
including the page-migration process, to a CPU core. Next,
we measure the CPU cycles consumed by the Linux kernel
processes after disabling only migrate_pages(), to evaluate
the performance overhead of identifying hot pages alone.
Our experiment, based on the methodology described
above, shows that ANB and DAMON increase the number

5.1 HPT and HWT
Need for cost-efficient top-𝐾 hot page and word trackers. Page Access Count (PAC) and Word Access Count (WAC)
are useful offline profiling mechanisms, but they have two
limitations when used as online mechanisms to determine
hot pages and words, respectively. First, they impose a high
storage cost. For example, PAC and WAC demand 128MB
and 8GB of memory space, respectively, to store the number of accesses to every page and word for 256GB of CXL
DRAM. Second, they require a significant amount of time
to determine the top-𝐾 hot pages and words because either
software or hardware must fetch all access counts and then
sort them. For instance, it takes hundreds of milliseconds
for a CPU core to access 2M 16-bit access counts for 8GB of

609

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

W
memory. This prevents us from making agile decisions on
2
1
3
hash-1
which pages to migrate.
2 3+1
1
0xZ
Algorithm and requirement. To minimize the storage and
1+1 0
3
2
hash-2
Memory
H
Min
performance overheads of determining hot pages and words
Address
without significantly compromising preciseness, we may ex1
2
2+1
ploit one of the top-𝐾 estimation algorithms for HPT and
hash-H
Comparator
CountMin-Sketch
HWT. Among such algorithms, streaming algorithms [45]
Tree
have been widely studied and adopted in various fields, from
Addr. Cnt.
5
networking applications [16] to Row-Hammer defense soNo
Address
Larger than
0xA
10
lutions [27, 40, 49]. Specifically, the streaming algorithms
hit
table-min
can be categorized into counter-based, sketch-based, and
Yes
Yes
6
4
K
sampling-based algorithms, represented by Space-Saving [43],
0xD
2
Update
Update
CountMin-Sketch (CM-Sketch) [12], and Sticky-Sampling [38],
Address &
0xZ
2
Counter
Counter
0xE
1
respectively. After analyzing the preciseness, scalability, and
Top-K sorted CAM
Control for top-K sorted CAM
hardware cost of these algorithms, we choose CountMinSketch (CM-Sketch) and compare it with a variant of SpaceSaving designed for a Row-Hammer defense solution, Mithril [27],
Figure 5. A CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker.
in this work.
To make HPT and HWT useful and practical, we determine
larger than the minimum access count, the entry storing the
the following requirements. First, they should be able to
minimum access count is updated with the address and the
handle each memory access every 2.5𝑛𝑠 (i.e., tCCD or the
access count from the CM-Sketch unit ( 6 ). In this way, the
highest memory access rate of DDR4 3200 DRAM). That is,
sorted CAM unit can keep track of the top-𝐾 hot addresses
they must operate at least at 400MHz. Second, when the
and quickly report them back to M5-manager (§5.2), which
host CPU queries the top-𝐾 hot addresses, it should be able
runs on the host CPU and places a query. Both the CM-Sketch
to return them quickly. Lastly, the hardware cost should be
unit and the sorted CAM unit can be reset immediately after
reasonable, although it is a secondary constraint.
the query is served to track a fresh set of the top-𝐾 hot
Architecture and operations. Both HPT and HWT share
addresses for the next epoch.
the same architecture and operations, except that they use
page and word addresses, similar to PAC and WAC, respec5.2 Manager
tively. In this section, we refer to both HPT and HWT as the
top-𝐾 tracker. A top-𝐾 tracker comprises (1) an SRAM-based
M5-manager consists of four components: 1 Monitor, 2
Nominator, 3 Elector, and 4 Promoter, providing a colCM-Sketch unit and (2) a sorted Content Addressable Memory (CAM) unit, which keep track of the (estimated) access
lection of interfaces and a template implemented in software
count of each accessed address and the top-𝐾 hot addresses,
(Figure 6). Monitor interfaces with performance counters in
respectively. Figure 5 illustrates the architecture and operthe host CPU, which provide useful statistics for users to deations of the top-𝐾 tracker. First, CM-Sketch comprises an
termine the frequency of page migration and assess whether
SRAM array with 𝐻 rows and𝑊 columns of entries, designed
the previous page migration was effective or not. Nominator
to estimate the number of accesses to a given address. Each
not only interfaces with HPT and HWT to collect hot page
entry stores an access count. For a given memory access,
and word addresses, respectively, but also processes these adthe address is applied to 𝐻 hash functions in parallel ( 1 ).
dresses to help users identify more useful hot pages. Elector
Each hash function is associated with a row, and one of the
offers a template that incorporates Monitor and Nominator,
𝑊 entries in the row, indexed by the hash function’s output
allowing users to easily design their hot-page migration polifor the address, is incremented by one ( 2 ). Among the 𝐻
cies. Promoter provides in-kernel components that interface
incremented access counts across the rows, the minimum
between Elector and the Linux kernel to launch the migravalue is determined by a comparator tree ( 3 ) and becomes
tion of pages identified by Nominator to DDR DRAM. Lastly,
the estimated access count of the address.
M5 depends on a capability of the latest Linux kernel, MultiSecond, the sorted CAM unit comprises 𝐾 entries, each
Generation LRU (MGLRU) [72], to choose pages to demote
storing a pair of an address (tag) and an access count (value),
to DDR DRAM. It has been proven to be robust, precise, and
sorted based on the access counts. When a memory address is
cost-effective in past work [25, 31, 44, 71].
The underlying implementation of M5-manager resemprovided, it is checked against the sorted CAM unit. For a hit,
the access count field of the matched CAM entry is updated
bles ANB, which periodically migrates pages. However, M5with the access count from the CM-Sketch unit ( 4 ). For a
manger differs from ANB in how migrations are triggered
miss, the access count is compared with the minimum access
and how responsive the migration is. Besides, the compocount from the sorted CAM unit ( 5 ). If the access count is
nents of M5-manager are all user-space programs except

610

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

addr

1 Monitor

3 Elector

Yan Sun et al.

be proportional to nr_pages(DDR) and nr_pages(CXL), respectively. To validate this hypothesis, we run mcf_r with
the nr_pages(DDR)/nr_pages(CXL) ratios of 2, 1, and 1/2
and observe that the bw(DDR)/bw(CXL) ratios are 2.02, 0.919,
and 0.571, respectively. From this, we can first infer that
bw(DDR) should increase and bw(CXL) should decrease, as
hotter pages are migrated to DDR DRAM. Second, we recognize that the bandwidth density, bw_den(node) (= bw(node)
/ nr_pages(node)), is also a useful metric to assess the density of hot pages. For instance, if bw_den(CXL) is higher
than bw_den(DDR), CXL DRAM may store more hot pages
per allocated capacity than DDR DRAM. Lastly, we note
that application performance is proportional to the total
consumed bandwidth (= bw(DDR) + bw(CXL)) for a given
execution phase.

Mem

/proc/zoneinfo
ctrl

pcm-memory

Rate
control

Migration
control

CXL-FPGA
Counters

DDR
DRAM

MG
LRU

LLC
Miss
HWT & HPT
Migration

CL >> 6

migrate_page()

_HPA

Mask
CXL
DRAM

0x1

_HWA
x64

0x7
0x1
0x1
2 Nominator

Reverse
Mapping
Promotor
4

Guideline 1: If bw_den(CXL) is higher than bw_den(DDR),
hot pages should be migrated from CXL DRAM to DDR
DRAM as soon and aggressively as possible.
Guideline 2: Hot pages can continue to be migrated to
DDR DRAM as long as bw(DDR) keeps increasing, even if
bw_den(DDR) exceeds bw_den(CXL).

Figure 6. An overview of the M5 manager.

for Promoter, whereas those of ANB are all kernel-space
programs. Such a design choice facilitates better software
compatibility with the fast-evolving kernel, as it minimizes
and isolates the code that depends on a specific kernel. It
also helps M5-manager seamlessly integrate with other kernel memory management functions, such as cgroup. The
remainder of this section describes the four M5-manager
components, along with guidelines derived from our extensive profiling of various benchmarks to help users design
effective page-migration policies.
1 Monitor. HPT can precisely and transparently identify
hot pages in CXL DRAM. Nonetheless, such a capability
alone is not sufficient to design an effective page-migration
solution, especially when the capacity of DDR DRAM allocated to a given application is constrained. Specifically,
since HPT cannot discern whether hot pages in CXL DRAM
are hotter than those in DDR DRAM, blindly migrating hot
pages identified by HPT to DDR DRAM may end up demoting even hotter pages to CXL DRAM, thereby degrading application performance. This demands metrics that
help a page-migration policy determine whether to migrate
pages and how aggressively they should be migrated to
DDR DRAM. To address such needs, M5-manager provides
Monitor, which captures various utilization statistics of a
given tiered-memory system through three functions described in Table 1: nr_pages(), bw(), and bw_den(). Note
that Monitor reports only read bandwidth because write
accesses to both DDR DRAM and CXL DRAM occur only
when they miss the LLC, which first incurs read accesses to
them under the write-allocate policy. Below we discuss why
these statistics can serve as useful metrics.
Suppose that nr_pages(DDR) and nr_pages(CXL) pages
are randomly allocated to DDR DRAM and CXL DRAM, respectively. When nr_pages(DDR) + nr_pages(CXL) is large
enough, we hypothesize that bw(DDR) and bw(CXL) should

2 Nominator. Based on the statistics from Monitor, M5manager may decide to migrate hot pages to DDR DRAM.
It may simply access HPT to get hot-page addresses and
then migrate these hot pages, also referred to as HPT-only
Nominator. However, as we discussed earlier (§4.1), we might
prefer to migrate dense hot pages over sparse ones, especially
when the hotness (i.e., access count) of pages is similar. To
identify denser hot pages, M5-manager provides Nominator,
which can also leverage hot-word addresses from HWT. It
comprises two data structures, _HPA and _HWA (Figure 6),
which store hot-page addresses and hot-word addresses from
HPT and HWT, respectively. Each entry of _HPA also stores a
64-bit mask, where each bit is set by the hot-word addresses
from _HWA that map to the PFN stored in the entry. Whenever invoked, Nominator accesses _HPA and _HWA, which are
periodically updated by HPT and HWT using the D2H memory access capability of CXL Type-2 devices (§2.2), to get
hot-page and hot-word addresses, respectively.
With _HPA and _HWA, it offers two mechanisms that facilitate a given hot-page migration policy to identify denser hot
pages. The first mechanism, dubbed HPT-driven Nominator,
searches _HPA updated by HPT, using the PFNs derived from
the hot-word addresses from _HWA. Upon finding a matching
PFN in _HPA, it sets one bit of the 64-bit mask, indexed by the
relative word address in the page. Depending on how many

Table 1. Monitor functions.
Function
nr_pages(node)
bw(node)
bw_den(node)

611

Description
Number of pages allocated to node
Consumed read bandwidth of node
bw(node) per allocated capacity

Tool
pcp-zoneinfo
pcm

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

mask bits are set in a hot page, the page-migration policy
can determine whether the hot page is sparse or dense. The
second mechanism, named HWT-driven Nominator, starts
with an empty list of _HPA and uses only hot-word addresses
from _HWA to construct _HPA. As HWT-driven Nominator
does, it searches _HPA using the page addresses converted
from hot-word addresses. If it does not find any match, it
adds the page address to the PFN field of an _HPA entry and
sets the 64-bit mask, which serves as an access count, to one.
If it finds a match, it increments the access count stored in
the associated 64-bit mask.
Guideline 3: HPT-driven Nominator can be useful for
applications with a mix of dense and sparse hot pages, such
as roms and liblinear.
Guideline 4: HWT-driven Nominator can be useful for
applications with only sparse hot pages, such as Redis and
Cachelib.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Algorithm 1: Elector
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

while (true) {
T = 1 / (fscale(bw_den(CXL) / bw_den(DDR)) * f_default);
bw_tot = bw(DDR) + bw(CXL);
rel_bw_den(DDR) = bw_den(DDR) / bw_tot;
if (rel_bw_den(DDR) - prev_rel_bw_den(DDR) > 0) {
Promoter(Nominator());
}
prev_bw_tot = bw_tot;
prev_rel_bw_den(DDR) = rel_bw_den(DDR);
sleep(T);
}

will reject the migration of a page if the user explicitly requests the page to be allocated on a CXL device or if the page
is pinned for Direct Memory Access (DMA). Subsequently,
when it determines that migrating the pages to DDR DRAM
is safe, it invokes migrate_pages().

3 Elector. Based on the statistics obtained by Monitor
and the hot pages identified by Nominator, Elector determines the frequency of page migration and whether to
migrate hot pages to DDR DRAM. Algorithm 1 provides a
sample Elector implementation where users can simply
statically or dynamically adapt tunable parameters. First,
following Guideline 1, we introduce a function, fscale(),
which scales the default frequency, f_default, for page
migration proportional to bw_den(CXL)/bw_den(DDR) (Algorithm 1:line-2). f_default is a tunable parameter, and
fscale() can employ a monotonically increasing linear or
non-linear function, such as 𝑦 = 𝑥 𝑛 or 𝑦 = 𝑛 × 𝑒𝑥𝑝 𝑥 , where
𝑛 is a tunable parameter. Next, we present two more functions, bw_tot and rel_bw_den(), i.e., bw(DDR) + bw(CXL)
and bw_den()/bw_tot, respectively. If rel_bw_den(DDR) increases compared to the previous period, the previously
migrated pages might have contributed to increasing the
bandwidth consumption of DDR DRAM, i.e., application performance, based on Guideline 2 (Algorithm 1:line-4—6). Thus,
Elector invokes Promoter to migrate hot pages nominated
by Nominator to DDR DRAM. Otherwise, Elector stops
migrating pages at the current period, as the migrated pages
have decreased the bandwidth consumption of DDR DRAM.
We normalize bw_den() to bw_tot to account for changes
in bw_den() caused by the execution-phase changes that
increase or decrease the intensity of memory access over
time.
4 Promoter. It provides an interface between Elector and
the Linux kernel to migrate hot pages decided by Nominator.
Specifically, upon receiving the hot-page addresses from
Elector, it updates a Linux kernel proc file, an in-kernel
component of Promoter, with these addresses. When the
proc file is updated, another in-kernel component first checks
whether the given pages can be safely migrated to DDR
DRAM, as certain pages may be pinned to specific nodes or
physical addresses for various reasons. For example, Promoter

6

Evaluation Setup

System. We use a dual-socket server based on the Intel 4th generation Xeon Scalable Processor. We connect the server
to the latest Intel Agilex-7 I-Series development kit [22] (or
simply Agilex7 henceforth), which serves as a CXL development platform in this work. Agilex7 is integrated with
a hardened CXL ×16 endpoint IP and a DDR4-2666 DRAM
controller connected to 8GB of on-board DRAM. We use the
same number of CPU cores as the number of benchmark
instances or threads and disable the remaining CPU cores
using the Linux CPU hotplug feature [59]. This is to capture
the interference incurred by the page-migration processes
by running the page-migration processes and one of the instances or threads of a given benchmark on the same CPU
core. Since we use only a subset of CPU cores, we scale the
LLC capacity proportional to the number of used CPU cores
using Intel Cache Allocation Technology (CAT) [23]. See
Table 2 for a detailed description of our system.
Benchmark. We evaluate twelve memory-intensive benchmarks. Specifically, we choose the four most memory-intensive
benchmarks from the SPECrate CPU 2017 benchmark suite [61]:
mcf_r, cactuBSSN_r, fotonik3d_r, and roms_r, after running all the benchmarks on our server and measuring LLC
Misses Per Kilo Instructions (MPKI). We run eight instances
of each SPECrate benchmark, which collectively have a memory footprint close to the capacity of our 8GB CXL DRAM,
Table 2. System configuration of a dual-socket server.
CPU
Memory

612

2× Intel® Xeon 6430 CPUs @2.1 GHz [21], 32 cores
and 60 MB LLC per CPU, Hyper-Threading disabled
Socket 0: 4× DDR5-4800 channels
Socket 1: 4× DDR5-4800 channels

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

Table 3. Evaluated benchmarks
Benchmark
Liblinear
BC
BFS
CC
PR
SSSP
TC
cactuBSSN_r
fotonik3d_r
mcf_r
roms_r
Redis

Description
Linear classification, tested with
KDD2012 dataset
Betweenness Centrality
Breadth-First Search
Connected Components
PageRank
Single-Source Shortest Paths
Triangle Counting
Einstein’s equations simulation
Photonic waveguide simulation
Single-depot vehicle scheduling
Free-surface ocean model simulation
In-memory KVS with YCSB-A

Footprint

# cores/ways

6.0GB

20/10

6.9GB
6.9GB
6.9GB
6.9GB
6.9GB
5.0GB
6.3GB
6.8GB
4.9GB

20/10
20/10
20/10
20/10
20/10
20/10
8/4
8/4
8/4

6.7GB

8/4

6.0GB

1/1

of a Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker while varying 𝑁 , which is
equivalent to 𝐻 ×𝑊 , as both represent the number of access
counts. We use 𝑁 for both hereafter. The Space-Saving top𝐾 tracker may comprise a sorted CAM unit with 𝑁 entries,
each storing an address (tag) and an access count (value).
The CAM unit is the same as the one used for the CM-Sketch
top-𝐾 tracker, but it requires 𝑁 CAM entries to store and
track the access counts of 𝑁 addresses, where 𝑁 should
be much larger than 𝐾. In contrast, the CM-Sketch top-𝐾
tracker stores the access counts of 𝑁 addresses in the SRAM
unit, while tracking the top-𝐾 access counts in the CAM unit,
decoupling the access counts from the sorted CAM unit. The
preciseness of both the Space-Saving and CM-Sketch top-𝐾
trackers increases with 𝑁 , but the CAM complexity of the
Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker limits 𝑁 .
Size and power under timing constraint. Before assessing
the average access-count ratio of top-𝐾 trackers, we synthesize both the Space-Saving and CM-Sketch top-𝐾 trackers for
various 𝑁 and fixed 𝐾 (= 5) with both Agilex7 and the 7𝑛𝑚
logic technology. This is done to determine the maximum 𝑁
that meets the 400MHz timing constraint for both the top-𝐾
trackers. Although our platform is based on FPGA, we also
evaluate ASIC-based top-𝐾 trackers, because they will be
used in industry CXL DRAM products. The Space-Saving
and CM-Sketch top-𝐾 trackers employ 𝑀 parallel CAM and
SRAM blocks (or banks), respectively, as design optimization
techniques to maximize 𝑁 while meeting the 400MHz timing constraint. For each memory address, the Space-Saving
top-𝐾 tracker must access all the CAM blocks in parallel,
whereas the CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracking accesses only one
SRAM block, which allows pipelined accesses to different
SRAM blocks for consecutive memory addresses.
The FPGA synthesis report shows that the Space-Saving
top-𝐾 tracker can have only up to 50 CAM entries, whereas
the CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker can have up to 128K SRAM
entries. This large difference in 𝑁 between the two top-𝐾
trackers arises from the fact that CM-Sketch uses a 𝐾-entry
CAM unit regardless of 𝑁 , whereas Space-Saving uses an
𝑁 -entry CAM unit. Table 4 lists the size and power consumption of the ASIC-based Space-Saving and CM-Sketch top-𝐾
trackers, with 𝐻 fixed at 4. In our evaluation, we sweep 𝐻
from 2 to 16 and see only a secondary effect on both the average access-count ratio and the timing. Even the ASIC-based
Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker can have at most 𝑁 = 2K, providing almost an order of magnitude fewer entries than the
FPGA-based CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker. For the same number of entries (e.g., 𝑁 = 2K), the Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker
consumes 33.6× and 7.6× more chip space and power than
the CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker, although it can offer better
preciseness.
Average access-count ratio. To evaluate the average accesscount ratio of HPT and HWT, based on Space-Saving and
CM-Sketch for diverse 𝑁 s, we use an in-house simulator,
as the FPGA-based Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker limits the

except for mcf_r. We run one instance of each of the following benchmarks: an in-memory database (Redis [54] version
6.0.16), a machine learning application (Liblinear [36] version 2.47), and six graph processing benchmarks (GAP [6]):
BFS, SSSP, PR, CC, BC, and TC, all using their original configurations. As inputs, we use YCSB-A [11] (Redis), KDD 2012 [35]
(Liblinear), Twitter [30] (BFS, CC, TC, and PR with undirected graph), and Google [1] (BC and SSSP with directed
graph). We adjust the size of these input datasets to have a
memory footprint close to 8GB. We limit the capacity of DDR
DRAM that a given benchmark can use to 3GB, ensuring that
roughly 50% of the pages can be migrated to DDR DRAM.
Page-migration solutions. We use ANB and DAMON as
CPU-driven page migration solutions. For ANB, we use Linux
version 5.19, as we assess it provides the most stable pagemigration performance; in some other Linux versions, ANB
fails to migrate any pages for certain benchmarks we evaluate. For DAMON we use Linux kernel version 6.11, which
has officially integrated it as one of the page-migration solutions. M5 is implemented in Linux kernel version 6.5. A
specific kernel version may affect application performance.
However, we decided not to port DAMON and ANB to the
same kernel version as M5 because of the following reasons.
First, we do not observe an obvious application performance
trend across different Linux kernel versions. Second, one of
the key evaluation points is the access-count ratios, which
are not affected by a specific kernel version.

7

Evaluation

In this section, we first explore the design space of CMSketch and Space-Saving top-𝐾 trackers, each implemented
with both Agilex7 and a 7𝑛𝑚 logic technology [10]. Second,
we compare the average access-count ratio and application
performance among ANB, DAMON, and M5.
7.1 Design Space Exploration of Top-𝐾 Trackers
To explore the design space of HPT and HWT, we assess the
average access-count ratio, size, and power of a CM-Sketch
top-𝐾 tracker while sweeping its key design parameter, i.e.,
the number of access counts (= 𝐻 ×𝑊 ). We also evaluate those

613

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

Power (𝑚𝑊 )
Space-Saving
CM-Sketch
based (CAM) based (SRAM)
0.7
2.0
1.3
2.2
6.4
2.7
15.0
3.2
29.9
3.9
7.9
23.2
83.8

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

mcf

pagerank

roms

geomean

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

liblinear

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

0.2

mcf

pagerank

roms

geomean

(a)
1
0.8
0.6

0.4

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

0

N

50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

0.2
50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K

Accuracy compared to PAC
Accuracy compared to WAC

CM-Sketch based (FPGA synthesizable)

0.4

fotonik

cactuBSSN

fotonik

liblinear

0.6
0.4
0.2
mean

redis

roms

mcf

foto.

cactu.

tc

sssp

pr

cc

bfs

bc

7.2 Full-System Comparison
Average access-count ratio. Figure 8 plots the average
access-count ratio of the best CPU-driven page-migration
solution between ANB and DAMON, along with M5, using
HPT based on both the Space-Saving and CM-Sketch top𝐾 trackers. These trackers are queried at rates determined
by Elector (Algorithm 1), which will be used for the endto-end performance evaluation later. This shows that HPT,
based on the CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker with 𝑁 = 32K, offers
3.5% and 47% higher average access-count ratios than HPT,
based on the Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker with 𝑁 = 50, and
the best CPU-driven page-migration solution, respectively,
on average.
The average access-count from HPT, based on the CMSketch top-𝐾 tracker with 𝑁 = 32K, is 0.72. That is, HPT
cannot always identify the true top-𝐾 hot pages because M5
determines these hot pages based on the access counts of
pages within a limited time window, whereas PAC reports the
top-𝐾 hot pages based on the entire execution time. As such,
HPT can hastily determine less hot pages in a given interval
because these pages were accessed intensively during the interval but not so much later. Meanwhile, some pages are not
accessed intensively but are constantly accessed throughout
the execution, eventually becoming the top-𝐾 hot pages at
the end. This does not mean that M5 is not as effective as we
hope, since it is likely that intensively accessed pages at the
moment will remain hot pages in the near future, although
this is not always the case for every application. Therefore,
to use M5 more effectively, it is essential to develop a sophisticated policy for Elector. Lastly, the same argument

0.6

cactuBSSN

0.8

𝑁 = 50. Nonetheless, under the timing constraint of FPGAbased implementations, we demonstrate that the CM-Sketch
top-𝐾 tracker can provide a higher average access-count
ratio than the Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker with larger 𝑁 .
For instance, HPT, based on the CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker
with 32K entries, which we will use for the evaluation of M5
(§7), offers the average access-count ratio of 0.97 on average
across the benchmarks. In contrast, HPT, based on the SpaceSaving top-𝐾 tracker with 50 CAM entries, offers the average
access-count ratio of 0.49 across the benchmarks. Lastly, the
average access-count ratio depends on how frequently M5manager checks with the top-𝐾 trackers, and we observe
that it increases the preciseness as the interval decreases.

0.8

0

M5 CM-Sketch (32K)

Figure 8. Agilex7-based average access-count ratios of HPT.

1

N

M5 Space-Saving (50)

0

evaluation only up to 𝑁 = 50 under the 400MHz constraint.
Specifically, we first use Intel Pin [24] and Ramulator [28] to
collect traces of cache-filtered and time-stamped addresses
to DRAM from our server running the four most memoryintensive SPECrate CPU 2017 benchmarks, Liblinear, and
PageRank. Then, we feed the traces into our simulator to evaluate the preciseness of HPT and HWT, each implemented
with both Space-Saving and CM-Sketch, while sweeping 𝑁 .
Later, we will use PAC (§7.2) and FPGA-based implementations of HPT, based on Space-Saving and CM-Sketch with 50
and 32K for 𝑁 , to evaluate the average access-count ratio in
the same way as we evaluate the CPU-driven page-migration
solutions (§7.2).
Figure 7 plots the average access-count ratio of (a) HPT
and (b) HWT, relative to the precise counting of accesses to
every page and word by PAC and WAC, respectively. In this
evaluation, we first vary 𝑁 while fixing 𝐾 to 5 and the query
period to 1𝑚𝑠 and 100𝜇𝑠 for HPT and HWT, respectively. The
average access-count ratio of both the Space-Saving and CMSketch top-𝐾 trackers strongly depends on 𝑁 . However, the
Space-Saving top-𝐾 tracker based is more precise than the
CM-Sketch top-𝐾 tracker for the same 𝑁 because CM-Sketch
severely suffers from hash collisions when 𝑁 is small. For
example, HPT, based on the CM-Sketch top-5 tracker with
𝑁 = 2K, achieves an average access-count ratio similar to
HPT based on the Space-Saving top-5 hot-page tracker with
Space-Saving based (FPGA synthesizable)
Space-Saving based (Logic 7nm synthesizable)

CPU-driven Best

1

lib.

Number of
Entries (𝑁 )
50
100
512
1K
2K
8K
32K
128K

Size (𝑢𝑚 2 )
Space-Saving
CM-Sketch
based (CAM) based (SRAM)
3,649
1,899
7,323
2,134
36,374
2,878
89,369
3,714
179,625
5,346
13,509
46,930
180,530

Access count ratio

Table 4. Size and power consumption of top-5 trackers.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

(b)

Figure 7. Simulation-based average access-count ratio of (a)
HPT and (b) HWT.

614

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

Norm. Performance

can be made for the CPU-driven page-migration solutions,
but M5, even with a simple policy, still offers notably higher
average access-count ratios for all the benchmarks, proving
its effectiveness.
End-to-end performance. Figure 9 plots the end-to-end
performance of the benchmarks when ANB, DAMON, and
M5 are deployed, normalized to that of ANB. For Redis, we
use the p99 latency as a performance metric and plot the
inverse of the normalized p99 latency values in Figure 9.
When starting to evaluate a given benchmark, we allocate
all pages of the benchmark to CXL DRAM and then let a
given page-migration solution migrate identified hot pages
to DDR DRAM. After the given DDR DRAM capacity (3GB)
is used up, whenever the page-migration solution migrates
a certain number of pages to DDR DRAM, it demotes the
same number of pages to CXL DRAM.
Between ANB and DAMON, DAMON provides the highest performance improvement. DAMON offers 6% and 81%
higher performance than ANB and no page migration, respectively. Since we provide M5-manager as a sample policy
to demonstrate the efficacy of HPT and HWT, we choose
𝑦 = 𝑥 𝑛 for fscale() and do not use any adaptive algorithm
to determine f_default for a given benchmark (i.e., out of
our intended scope). For this evaluation, we simply try a few
reasonable values of 𝑛 (e.g., 3 to 6) and f_default (e.g., 1),
and then choose the best performance, which shows 14%
and 106% higher performance than DAMON and no page
migration, respectively. The performance improvement of
M5 over ANB and DAMON comes from two aspects of M5:
(1) it incurs a much lower cost for identifying hot pages
and (2) it identifies hotter pages than ANB and DAMON.
Especially, the performance improvement of Redis is 10%
and 43% compared to ANB and DAMON, respectively, when
we detect hot pages based on HWT-driven Nominator (M5
(HWT)), as M5 chooses more useful hot pages than ANB and
DAMON with virtually no performance cost.
Note that ANB and M5 improve the performance of Redis
by 8% and 18-19%, respectively, whereas DAMON degrades
the performance by 16%. This is because DAMON continues
to scan PTEs even after page migration reaches an equilibrium state (i.e., when the given DDR DRAM capacity is
fully occupied), despite further migration providing little
ANB

4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
lib.

bc

bfs

DAMON

cc

pr

performance improvement due to Redis’ uniform random
memory accesses. Meanwhile, we observe that ANB rarely
unmaps pages at this state (i.e., incurring little performance
overhead for identifying hot pages). This also explains why
M5 outperforms DAMON, reemphasizing the importance
of minimizing performance overhead when identifying hot
pages.
Figure 10 plots the distribution of access counts of all
pages in each benchmark, collected with PAC. This partially
explains why M5 provides 24% and 14% higher performance
than ANB and DAMON, respectively, for Liblinear, with no
improvement in PageRank compared to ANB and DAMON.
The access is more skewed in the case of Liblinear, which
rewards M5 for migrating hot pages more precisely. This also
explains why M5 delivers 96% and 30% higher performance
than ANB and DAMON, respectively, for roms_r, showing
superior improvement over the other SPECrate benchmarks.
As shown, the p90, p95, and p99 pages of roms_r are 2×, 8×,
17× more frequently accessed than the p50 page, respectively.
In contrast, other benchmarks exhibit similar levels of
hotness across pages. For instance, once approximately the
top p50 hot page in TC are migrated to DDR DRAM, the
bottom p50 page has only 288 more accesses than that of
the bottom p10 page on average. This is not enough of the
number of accesses to amortize the cost of page migration
(∼54𝜇𝑠 in our setup), which requires more than 318 accesses
(= 54𝜇𝑠/(270𝑛𝑠 - 100𝑛𝑠)) on average. For such applications,
we should conservatively migrate pages to DDR DRAM after
enough pages are migrated to occupy a given capacity of
DDR DRAM, as the cost of page migration may outweigh
the benefit.

8

Discussion

Scalability of the top-𝐾 tracker based on CM-Sketch.
As the capacity of CXL memory and the overall memory
footprint of applications increase, the address cardinality
(i.e., the number of unique addresses) increases. This may
increase collisions in the CM-Sketch unit’s entries, each estimating (or tracking) the number of accesses to a given
address, and thus decrease the accuracy of the top-𝐾 tracker.
Figure 11 shows the preciseness of the top-𝐾 trackers with
32K CM-Sketch entries as the memory footprint increases.

M5(HPT)

sssp

tc

M5(HWT)

cactu.

foto.

M5(HPT+HWT)

mcf

roms

redis

mean

Figure 9. Performance of DAMON and M5 normalized to that of no page migration. ‘HPT,’ ‘HWT,’ and ‘HPT+HWT’ denote
HPT-only, HWT-driven, and HPT-driven Nominator configurations.

615

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

lib.

1.0

bc

bfs

cc

pr

tc

cactu.

roms

foto.

sssp

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

using hot 4KB page addresses from HPT, as we identify hot
4KB page addresses from the hot 64B word addresses (§5.2).
Alternatively, we can deploy another HPT modified to track
hot page addresses in 2MB granularity. In both approaches,
M5 needs to consult with the OS to check whether these
page addresses belong to allocated huge pages.

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

9

CDF

0.0

mcf

1.0

redis

Hardware-assisted hot-page detection. A large body of
prior work has proposed hardware-assisted mechanisms for
identifying hot pages (e.g., MemPod [51], PoM [60], SILCFM [56], and HoPP [33]). However, these mechanisms are
often tightly integrated with the CPU architecture, demanding changes in the CPU’s memory subsystem, such as DRAM
controllers. Notably, PoM and SILC-FM specifically target
the CPU with 3D-stacked DRAM. In contrast, M5 exploits
the unique properties of commodity CXL devices built on an
industry-standard interface to the CPU. As such, M5 is decoupled from the specific generations of CPU architectures,
facilitating the evaluation of page-migration solutions with
commodity servers, making it more practical and adoptable.
A recent study [74] explores Intel Flat Memory Mode
(IFMM) [39], where DDR memory acts as an exclusive cache
for CXL memory. When a CXL memory address is accessed,
the memory controller swaps a 64B word at the CXL memory address with a 64B word at the one-to-one mapped DDR
memory address. This eliminates the expensive operations
needed for page migration, shooting down TLB entries, updating page table entries, and copying entire 4KB pages,
especially for sparse hot pages. However, IFMM is limited to
the case where local DDR memory and remote CXL memory
have the same capacity because of the one-to-one mapping
between CXL and DDR memory addresses for swapping.
Therefore, M5 can be synergistically used with IFMM when
remote CXL DRAM is larger than local DDR DRAM. For
example, IFMM can migrate hot words in sparse pages to
DDR DRAM while M5 can migrate hot dense pages to DDR
DRAM.
We recognize that the latest work, NeoMem, on tracking
hot pages in the CXL controller [75] as concurrent work. It
shares one of the observations we have made in this work—
high cost of identifying hot pages—and then proposes a CMSketch-based top-𝐾 tracker to tackle this challenge. However, in contrast to NeoMem, we also present PAC and WAC,
which have enabled us to precisely evaluate the access-count
ratio of identified hot pages, thereby assessing the usefulness
of hot pages identified not only by the latest CPU-driven
page migration solutions but also by M5. Lastly, NeoMem
does not track hot-word addresses, while M5 does.
Hot-value tracking algorithms. Identifying frequently
accessed (hot) values in a time- and space-efficient way is
a problem that has been extensively studied. Sketch [50],
Bloom filter [37], cuckoo filter [17], and HyperLogLog [19]

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Log10(Access count)

7

8

Accuracy (compared to PAC)

Figure 10. Distribution of access counts per 4KB page.
mcf

roms

fotonik

x4

x8

cactuBSSN

1
0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2

0
x1

x2

x16

x32

Related Work

x64

Number of processes

Figure 11. Accuracy of CM-Sketch with 32K entries as the
working set size increases.
We increase the memory footprint of mcf_r, cactuBSSN_r,
fotonik3d_r, and roms_r by increasing the number of corunning instances (or processes), each using a unique range
of physical addresses. The 32 processes of these benchmarks
demand 20GB to 27GB of memory capacity. This shows that
the preciseness of the top-𝐾 tracker decreases gracefully as
the memory footprint increases. The top-𝐾 tracker based on
CM-Sketch consumes a small amount of chip space, even
for 32K entries, accounting for only 0.01% of the total chip
space of all DRAM dies in an 8GB DRAM module. Therefore,
for a larger DRAM capacity, we may increase the number
of CM-Sketch entries to 128K (Table 4). If we need more
than 128K CM-Sketch entries, we may increase the number
of top-𝐾 tracker instances, each paired with a DRAM rank
or module [57]. Nonetheless, we conservatively expect that
the chip sapce per GB for the top-𝐾 tracker remains mostly
constant.
Hot huge pages. The evaluated benchmarks in this work
do not allocate huge pages. For applications allocating 2MB
huge pages, we can extend M5 to track hot 2M page addresses

616

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

have been applied in multiple applications, including heavyhitter detection and packet filtering in networking flows [3,
47], data analytics [9, 13], key-value data store [34, 73], and
genomic analysis in computational biology [29]. In this work,
we repurposed CM-Sketch, a streaming algorithm, to track
hot page and word addresses for a tiered-memory system.

10

Conclusion

To tackle the challenges of effectively managing tiered-memory
systems, first, this work proposed a CXL-driven, hardwareassisted profiling solution that leverages the unique capabilities of an FPGA-based CXL device. Second, this work
showed that CPU-driven page-migration solutions often not
only classify warm pages as hot pages—many of which may
also be sparse—but also incur notable performance overhead. Lastly, this work presented M5, a platform for developing CXL-driven page-migration solutions. M5 provides
hardware-based hot page and word trackers in the CXL controller, along with software interfaces and guidelines for
designing effective migration policies. Our evaluation has
demonstrated that M5 can identify useful hot pages more
precisely than the CPU-driven page migration solutions,
with virtually no performance overhead, leading to higher
application performance.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a grant from PRISM,
one of the seven centers in JUMP 2.0, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA, by
a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded
by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00405857),
by the MSIT, Korea, under the Global Scholars Invitation
Program (RS-2024-00456287) supervised by the IITP, by the
Samsung Electronics, and by a generous gift from Intel Corp.

A

Artifact Appendix

A.1 Abstract
The artifact includes the source code of M5 which is composed of PAC (Page Access Counter), HPT (Hot Page Tracker),
HWT (Hot Word Tracker), the userspace M5-manager, and
finally the kernel changes involved to support M5. Its goal
is to reproduce the results of Figure 8, 9, and 10 in the paper comparing with Automatic NUMA Balancing (ANB) and
DAMON. The artifact also contains instructions and scripts
for setting up a system and conducting experiments.
A.2

• Compilation: gcc-11.4 for M5 and ANB, and DAMON.
The FPGA project is compiled with Intel Quartus Prime
v23.2.
• Data set: We use the YCSB-A [11] workload and the KDD
2012 [35] for Redis and Liblinear, respectively, while Twitter [30] and Google [1] as inputs for GAP.
• Run-time environment: M5 with Linux kernel version
6.5, ANB with Linux kernel version 5.19, and DAMON runs
with the Linux kernel version 6.11.
• Hardware: Intel Xeon Scalable processor supporting CXL
and an Intel Agilex 7 I-series FPGA, version R1BES, listed in
Table 2.
• Run-time state: An idle system.
• Metrics: The access count ratio is reported from the experiment of Figure 8. YCSB running with Redis reports the 99th
percentile latency in nanoseconds. All the other benchmarks
in Figure 9 reports the execution time in seconds.
• Output: The experiment scripts output the result to text
files. Figures 8, 9, and 10 show the expected results.
• Experiments Figure 8: The experiment compares the tracking accuracy of various tracking methods. We have each
scheme 1) detect hot pages, 2) retrieve access count for the
access to these hot pages, and 3) analyze how many times
they are accessed.
• Experiments Figure 9: The end-to-end performance evaluation for application in each scheme.
• Experiments Figure 10: We plot the access count for each
application in Figure 8, to draw a CDF plot of the access
count.
• How much disk space required (approximately)?: Around
20 GB for GAPBS graph data sets and 50 GB for SPEC 2017.
Finally, about 300 GB is required for storing the generated
results.
• How much time is needed to prepare workflow (approximately)?: About 3 hours.
• How much time is needed to complete experiments
(approximately)?: About 48 hours.
• Publicly available?: All software and hardware RTL are
available in https://github.com/ece-fast-lab/ASPLOS-25-M5.
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: GPL 2.0
• Archived: https://zenodo.org/records/14303160

A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to access. The source code is provided at https:
//github.com/ece-fast-lab/ASPLOS-2025-M5. In the rest of
the section, repo refers to directory that holds the aforementioned GitHub repository. All benchmarks, except for SPEC
CPU2017, are publicly available:
• GAPBs: https://github.com/sbeamer/gapbs
• YCSB: https://github.com/brianfrankcooper/YCSB
• Liblinear: https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/liblinear/

Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Program: Four benchmarks from SPECrate CPU 2017
(505.mcf_r, 507.cactuBSSN_r, 549.roms_r, and 554.roms_r),
Redis version 6.0.16, Liblinear version 2.47, and GAP Benchmark Suite (BFS, SSSP, PR, CC, BC, and TC). The details of
benchmarks are described in Table 3 in the paper. All benchmarks are public.

A.4 Installation
A.4.1 Hardware. The following steps describe how to
configure the FPGA.
$ cd repo/hw

617

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

[3] Anup Agarwal, Zaoxing Liu, and Srinivasan Seshan. 2022. HeteroSketch: Coordinating Network-wide Monitoring in Heterogeneous and Dynamic Networks. In 19th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation.
[4] Neha Agarwal and Thomas F. Wenisch. 2017. Thermostat:
Application-Transparent Page Management for Two-Tiered
Main Memory. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems.
[5] Andrea Arcangeli. accessed in 2024.
AutoNUMA.
https://blog.linuxplumbersconf.org/2012/wp-content/
uploads/2012/09/2012-lpc-virt-autonuma-arcangeli.pdf.
[6] Scott Beamer, Krste Asanovic, and David A. Patterson. 2015.
The GAP Benchmark Suite. CoRR abs/1508.03619 (2015).
arXiv:1508.03619 http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.03619
[7] Shai Bergman, Priyank Faldu, Boris Grot, Lluís Vilanova, and
Mark Silberstein. 2022. Reconsidering OS Memory Optimizations in the Presence of Disaggregated Memory. In Proceedings
of the 2022 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Memory
Management. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–14.
[8] Irina Calciu, M. Talha Imran, Ivan Puddu, Sanidhya Kashyap,
Hasan Al Maruf, Onur Mutlu, and Aasheesh Kolli. 2021. Rethinking Software Runtimes for Disaggregated Memory. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems.
[9] Monica Chiosa, Thomas B. Preußer, and Gustavo Alonso. 2021.
SKT: A One-Pass Multi-Sketch Data Analytics Accelerator.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 14, 11 (2021).
[10] Lawrence T Clark, Vinay Vashishtha, Lucian Shifren, Aditya
Gujja, Saurabh Sinha, Brian Cline, Chandarasekaran Ramamurthy, and Greg Yeric. 2016. ASAP7: A 7-nm FinFET Predictive Process Design Kit. Microelectronics Journal 53 (2016),
105–115.
[11] Brian F. Cooper, Adam Silberstein, Erwin Tam, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and Russell Sears. 2010. Benchmarking Cloud Serving
Systems with YCSB. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Symposium
on Cloud Computing (Indianapolis, Indiana, USA).
[12] Graham Cormode and Shan Muthukrishnan. 2005. An Improved Data Stream Summary: The Count-Min Sketch and Its
Applications. Journal of Algorithms 55, 1 (2005), 58–75.
[13] Michael Correll and Michael Gleicher. 2016. The Semantics of
Sketch: Flexibility In Visual Query Systems For Time Series
Data. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology.
[14] CXL Consortium. accessed in 2025. Compute Express Link
(CXL).
https://www.computeexpresslink.org.
[15] Padmapriya Duraisamy, Wei Xu, Scott Hare, Ravi Rajwar,
David Culler, Zhiyi Xu, Jianing Fan, Christopher Kennelly,
Bill McCloskey, Danijela Mijailovic, Brian Morris, Chiranjit
Mukherjee, Jingliang Ren, Greg Thelen, Paul Turner, Carlos Villavieja, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and Amin Vahdat. 2023. Towards an Adaptable Systems Architecture for
Memory Tiering at Warehouse-Scale. In Proceedings of the
28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems.
[16] Cristian Estan and George Varghese. 2002. New Directions
in Traffic Measurement and Accounting. In Proceedings of the

$ bash program_fpga.sh bitstreams/m5_cm_banking.cdf
$ sudo poweroff
$ <Power on with BMC>
$ cd repo/setup
$ bash setup_m5.sh

A.4.2 Software. The repo provides one folder for each
tested kernel in repo/kernels. The file paths in setup_m5.sh
needs to be updated for the benchmark and binary paths.
Please refer to repo/README.md for compiling and switching
the kernel between tests.
A.5 Experiment workflow
A.5.1 Setup. This setup will setup the platform for testing.
• Kernel switch: Edit /etc/default/grub, and apply
the changes with update-grub.
• Program FPGA / Setup: Instructions listed in the
Section A.4.
A.5.2 Experiments. The experiments are embedded in
the provided scripts, and the input arguments depend on the
test case. Please refer to the testing_scripts/README.md
for more details. The data of Figure 10 is part of Figure 8.
$ cd repo/testing_scripts
$ bash fig8_eval_all.sh <arg>
$ bash fig9_eval_all.sh <arg>

The following steps describe how to parse and visualize the results. All steps are performed in the directory
repo/results. The results will be stored in generated PDF
files.
$ bash organize_results.sh
$ bash parse_all_figs.sh
$ python3 plot_all_figs.py

A.6 Evaluation and expected results
The experiment in Figure 8 shows a high access count ratio for the CM-sketch algorithm compared to the software
schemes.The end-to-end performance evaluation in Figure 9
shows M5 outperforms the software baselines by 14%. Finally, Figure 10 shows the access distribution of the tested
benchmarks.

References
[1] Abdullah T. Mughrabi. accessed in 2024. GraphBrew GAPBS.
https://github.com/UVA-LavaLab/GraphBrew.
[2] Ahmed Abulila, Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Zaid Qureshi, Jian
Huang, Nam Sung Kim, Jinjun Xiong, and Wen-mei Hwu.
2019. FlatFlash: Exploiting the Byte-Accessibility of SSDs
within a Unified Memory-Storage Hierarchy. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems.

618

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

2002 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures,
and Protocols for Computer Communications. 323–336.
[17] Bin Fan, Dave G Andersen, Michael Kaminsky, and Michael D
Mitzenmacher. 2014. Cuckoo Filter: Practically Better Than
Bloom. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM International on Conference on emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies.
75–88.
[18] Vishal Gupta, Min Lee, and Karsten Schwan. 2015. HeteroVisor: Exploiting Resource Heterogeneity to Enhance the Elasticity of Cloud Platforms. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International Conference on Virtual Execution
Environments.
[19] Stefan Heule, Marc Nunkesser, and Alexander Hall. 2013. HyperLogLog in Practice: Algorithmic Engineering of a State
of The Art Cardinality Estimation Algorithm. In Proceedings
of the 16th International Conference on Extending Database
Technology.
[20] Intel. accessed in 2024. Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B. https://
cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/671427.
[21] Intel Corporation. accessed in 2023. Intel Xeon Gold 6430
Processor. https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/
products/231737/intel-xeon-gold-6430-processor-60mcache-2-10-ghz.html.
[22] Intel Corporation. accessed in 2023. Intel® Agilex™ 7 FPGA
I-Series Development Kit.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/
details/fpga/development-kits/agilex/i-series/devagi027.html.
[23] Intel Corporation. accessed in 2024. Improving Real-Time
Performance by Utilizing Cache Allocation Technology.
https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/
documents/white-papers/cache-allocation-technologywhite-paper.pdf.
[24] Intel Corporation. accessed in 2024. Pin - A Dynamic Binary
Instrumentation Tool.
https://www.intel.com/content/
www/us/en/developer/articles/tool/pin-a-dynamic-binaryinstrumentation-tool.html.
[25] Jonathan Corbet. accessed in 2024. Merging the multigenerational LRU. https://lwn.net/Articles/894859/.
[26] Jonghyeon Kim, Wonkyo Choe, and Jeongseob Ahn. 2021.
Exploring the Design Space of Page Management for MultiTiered Memory Systems. In 2021 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference.
[27] Michael Jaemin Kim, Jaehyun Park, Yeonhong Park, Wanju
Doh, Namhoon Kim, Tae Jun Ham, Jae W. Lee, and Jung
Ho Ahn. 2022. Mithril: Cooperative Row Hammer Protection on Commodity DRAM Leveraging Managed Refresh.
In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance
Computer Architecture. 1156–1169. https://doi.org/10.1109/
HPCA53966.2022.00088
[28] Yoongu Kim, Weikun Yang, and Onur Mutlu. 2015. Ramulator: A Fast and Extensible DRAM Simulator. IEEE Computer
Architecture Letters 15, 1 (2015), 45–49.
[29] Can Kockan, Kaiyuan Zhu, Natnatee Dokmai, Nikolai Karpov,
M Oguzhan Kulekci, David P Woodruff, and S Cenk Sahinalp.
2020. Sketching Algorithms for Genomic Data Analysis and
Querying in a Secure Enclave. Nature methods 17, 3 (2020).

[30] Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon.
2010. What is Twitter, a Social Network or a News Media?.
In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World
Wide Web (Raleigh, North Carolina, USA). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 591–600. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1772690.1772751
[31] Taehyung Lee, Sumit Kumar Monga, Changwoo Min, and
Young Ik Eom. 2023. MEMTIS: Efficient Memory Tiering with
Dynamic Page Classification and Page Size Determination.
In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles.
[32] Yunjae Lee, Yoonhee Kim, and Heon Y. Yeom. 2020. Lightweight Memory Tracing for Hot Data Identification. Cluster
Computing 23 (09 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-02003130-1
[33] Haifeng Li, Ke Liu, Ting Liang, Zuojun Li, Tianyue Lu, Hui
Yuan, Yinben Xia, Yungang Bao, Mingyu Chen, and Yizhou
Shan. 2023. HoPP: Hardware-Software Co-Designed Page
Prefetching for Disaggregated Memory. In IEEE International
Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture.
[34] Yongkun Li, Chengjin Tian, Fan Guo, Cheng Li, and Yinlong
Xu. 2019. ElasticBF: Elastic Bloom Filter with Hotness Awareness for Boosting Read Performance in Large Key-Value Stores.
In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference.
[35] Chih-Jen Lin. accessed in 2024. KDD CUP 2012 Dataset in
LIBSVM Format.
https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvmtools/datasets/
binary.html#kdd2012.
[36] Chih-Jen Lin. accessed in 2024. LIBLINEAR – A Library for
Large Linear Classification.
https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/liblinear/.
[37] Lailong Luo, Deke Guo, Richard T. B. Ma, Ori Rottenstreich,
and Xueshan Luo. 2019. Optimizing Bloom Filter: Challenges,
Solutions, and Comparisons. IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials 21, 2 (2019).
[38] Gurmeet Singh Manku and Rajeev Motwani. 2002. Approximate Frequency Counts over Data Streams. In VLDB’02: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Very Large
Databases. Elsevier, 346–357.
Orchestrating
[39] Manoj Sukumaran. accessed in 2024.
Memory Disaggregation with Compute Express Link.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/contentdetails/817889/orchestrating-memory-disaggregation-withcompute-express-link.html.
[40] Michele Marazzi, Patrick Jattke, Flavien Solt, and Kaveh Razavi.
2022. PROTRR: Principled yet Optimal In-DRAM Target Row
Refresh. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy.
[41] Adnan Maruf, Ashikee Ghosh, Janki Bhimani, Daniel
Campello, Andy Rudoff, and Raju Rangaswami. 2022. MULTICLOCK: Dynamic Tiering for Hybrid Memory Systems. In
IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture.
[42] Hasan Al Maruf, Hao Wang, Abhishek Dhanotia, Johannes
Weiner, Niket Agarwal, Pallab Bhattacharya, Chris Petersen, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Shobhit Kanaujia, and Prakash
Chauhan. 2023. TPP: Transparent Page Placement for CXLEnabled Tiered-Memory. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming

619

M5: Mastering Page Migration and Mem Management for CXL-based Tiered Mem Sys

Languages and Operating Systems.
[43] Ahmed Metwally, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi.
2005. Efficient Computation of Frequent and Top-k Elements
in Data Streams. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Database Theory. Springer, 398–412.
[44] Michael Larabel. accessed in 2024. MGLRU Continues To
Look Very Promising For Linux Kernel Performance. https:
//www.phoronix.com/news/Linux-MGLRU-v9-Promising.
[45] Shanmugavelayutham Muthukrishnan. 2005. Data Streams:
Algorithms and Applications. Foundations and Trends® in
Theoretical Computer Science (2005).
[46] Alan Nair, Sandeep Kumar, Aravinda Prasad, Ying Huang,
Andy Rudoff, and Sreenivas Subramoney. 2024. Telescope:
Telemetry for Gargantuan Memory Footprint Applications. In
Proceedings of the 2024 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual
Technical Conference.
[47] Hun Namkung, Zaoxing Liu, Daehyeok Kim, Vyas Sekar, and
Peter Steenkiste. 2023. Sketchovsky: Enabling Ensembles of
Sketches on Programmable Switches. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation.
[48] SeongJae Park. accessed in 2024. DAMON: Data Access Monitor.
https://sjp38.github.io/post/damon/.
[49] Yeonhong Park, Woosuk Kwon, Eojin Lee, Tae Jun Ham, Jung
Ho Ahn, and Jae W. Lee. 2020. Graphene: Strong yet Lightweight Row Hammer Protection. In Proceedings of the 53rd
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture.
[50] Mert Pilanci and Martin J. Wainwright. 2017. Newton Sketch:
A Near Linear-Time Optimization Algorithm with LinearQuadratic Convergence. SIAM Journal on Optimization 27, 1
(2017).
[51] Andreas Prodromou, Mitesh Meswani, Nuwan Jayasena,
Gabriel Loh, and Dean M. Tullsen. 2017. MemPod: A Clustered
Architecture for Efficient and Scalable Migration in Flat Address Space Multi-level Memories. In 2017 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture.
[52] Zaid Qureshi, Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Isaac Gelado, Seungwon Min, Amna Masood, Jeongmin Park, Jinjun Xiong, C. J.
Newburn, Dmitri Vainbrand, I-Hsin Chung, Michael Garland,
William Dally, and Wen-mei Hwu. 2023. GPU-Initiated OnDemand High-Throughput Storage Access in the BaM System
Architecture. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2.
[53] Amanda Raybuck, Tim Stamler, Wei Zhang, Mattan Erez, and
Simon Peter. 2021. HeMem: Scalable Tiered Memory Management for Big Data Applications and Real NVM. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles.
[54] Redis Ltd. accessed in 2023. Redis.
https://redis.io/.
[55] Jie Ren, Dong Xu, Junhee Ryu, Kwangsik Shin, Daewoo Kim,
and Dong Li. 2024. MTM: Rethinking Memory Profiling and
Migration for Multi-Tiered Large Memory. In Proceedings of
the 19th European Conference on Computer Systems.
[56] Jee Ho Ryoo, Mitesh R. Meswani, Andreas Prodromou, and
Lizy K. John. 2017. SILC-FM: Subblocked InterLeaved CacheLike Flat Memory Organization. In 2017 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

[57] Samir
Rajadnya,
Durgesh
Srivastava.
accessed
in 2024.
CMS: Hotness Tracking Requirements.
https://www.opencompute.org/documents/ocp-cmshotness-tracking-requirements-white-paper-pdf-1.
[58] Debendra Das Sharma. 2022. Compute Express Link (CXL):
Enabling Heterogeneous Data-Centric Computing With Heterogeneous Memory Hierarchy. IEEE Micro (2022). https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MM.2022.3228561
[59] Sebastian Andrzej Siewior, Rusty Russell, Srivatsa Vaddagiri,
Ashok Raj, Joel Schopp, and Thomas Gleixner. accessed in
2024. CPU hotplug in the Kernel. https://docs.kernel.org/coreapi/cpu_hotplug.html.
[60] Jaewoong Sim, Alaa R. Alameldeen, Zeshan Chishti, Chris
Wilkerson, and Hyesoon Kim. 2014. Transparent Hardware
Management of Stacked DRAM as Part of Memory. In 47th
Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture.
[61] Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation. accessed
in 2024. SPEC CPU2017 Benchmark Suites. https://
www.spec.org/cpu2017/.
[62] Yan Sun, Yifan Yuan, Zeduo Yu, Reese Kuper, Chihun Song,
Jinghan Huang, Houxiang Ji, Siddharth Agarwal, Jiaqi Lou,
Ipoom Jeong, Ren Wang, Jung Ho Ahn, Tianyin Xu, and
Nam Sung Kim. 2023. Demystifying CXL Memory with Genuine CXL-Ready Systems and Devices. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture.
[63] Yupeng Tang, Ping Zhou, Wenhui Zhang, Henry Hu, Qirui
Yang, Hao Xiang, Tongping Liu, Jiaxin Shan, Ruoyun Huang,
Cheng Zhao, Cheng Chen, Hui Zhang, Fei Liu, Shuai Zhang,
Xiaoning Ding, and Jianjun Chen. 2024. Exploring Performance and Cost Optimization with ASIC-Based CXL Memory.
In Proceedings of the Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems. New York, NY, USA.
[64] Vinicius Petrucci, Eishan Mirakhur, Rita Gupta, Mahesh
Wagh, Nikesh Agarwal, Su Wei Lim, Vishal Tanna. accessed
in 2025. CXL Memory Expansion: A Closer Look on Actual
Platform. https://www.micron.com/content/dam/micron/
global/public/products/white-paper/cxl-memory-expansiona-close-look-on-actual-platform.pdf.
[65] Vishal Verma. accessed in 2024.
Tiering-0.8.
https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/vishal/
tiering.git/log/?h=tiering-0.8.
[66] Hao Wang, Chang-Jae Park, Gyung-su Byun, Jung Ho Ahn,
and Nam Sung Kim. 2015. Alloy: Parallel-Serial Memory Channel Architecture for Single-Chip Heterogeneous Processor Systems. In IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture.
[67] Lingfeng Xiang, Zhen Lin, Weishu Deng, Hui Lu, Jia Rao, Yifan
Yuan, and Ren Wang. 2024. NOMAD: Non-Exclusive Memory
Tiering via Transactional Page Migration. In Proceedings of
the 18th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation.
[68] Zi Yan, Daniel Lustig, David Nellans, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. 2019. Nimble Page Management for Tiered Memory Systems. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems.

620

ASPLOS ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Yan Sun et al.

Level Structure and Heterogeneous Bloom Filter. IEEE Access
(2018).
[74] Yuhong Zhong, Daniel S. Berger, Carl Waldspurger, Ryan Wee,
Ishwar Agarwal, Rajat Agarwal, Frank Hady, Karthik Kumar,
Mark D. Hill, Mosharaf Chowdhury, and Asaf Cidon. 2024.
Managing Memory Tiers with CXL in Virtualized Environments. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation.
[75] Zhe Zhou, Yiqi Chen, Tao Zhang, Yang Wang, Ran Shu, Shuotao Xu, Peng Cheng, Lei Qu, Yongqiang Xiong, Jie Zhang,
and Guangyu Sun. 2024. NeoMem: Hardware/Software CoDesign for CXL-Native Memory Tiering. In 57th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture.

[69] Ying Huang. accessed in 2024.
Memory Tiering:
Hot Page Selection with Hint Page Fault Latency.
https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-mm/patch/
20210722031819.3446711-5-ying.huang@intel.com/.
[70] Jung. H. Yoon. 2015. 3D NAND Technology: Implications to
Enterprise Storage Applications. In Proceedings of the Flash
Memory Summit (FMS’15).
[71] Yu Zhao. accessed in 2024.
Java / POWER9 Benchmark with MGLRU.
https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/
20221221000748.1374772-1-yuzhao@google.com/.
[72] Yu Zhao. accessed in 2024.
Multi-Gen LRU Framework. https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20220614071650.2060641-yuzhao@google.com/l.
[73] Weitao Zhang, Yinlong Xu, Yongkun Li, Yueming Zhang, and
Dinglong Li. 2018. FlameDB: A Key-Value Store With Grouped

621

