SmoothE: Differentiable E-Graph Extraction
Yaohui Cai

Kaixin Yang

Chenhui Deng

yc2632@cornell.edu
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

ky427@cornell.edu
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

cd574@cornell.edu
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

Cunxi Yu

Zhiru Zhang

cunxiyu@umd.edu
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, Maryland, USA

zhiruz@cornell.edu
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

Abstract
E-graphs have gained increasing popularity in compiler optimization, program synthesis, and theorem proving tasks.
They enable compact representation of many equivalent expressions and facilitate transformations via rewrite rules
without phase ordering limitations. A major benefit of using
e-graphs is the ability to explore a large space of equivalent expressions, allowing the extraction of an expression
that best meets certain optimization objectives (or cost models). However, current e-graph extraction methods often face
unfavorable scalability-quality trade-offs and only support
simple linear cost functions, limiting their applicability to
more realistic optimization problems.
In this work, we propose SmoothE, a differentiable e-graph
extraction algorithm designed to handle complex cost models and optimized for GPU acceleration. More specifically, we
approach the e-graph extraction problem from a probabilistic perspective, where the original discrete optimization is
relaxed to a continuous differentiable form. This formulation
supports any differentiable cost functions and enables efficient searching for solutions using gradient descent. We implement SmoothE in PyTorch to leverage the advancements
of the modern machine learning ecosystem. Additionally, we
introduce performance optimization techniques to exploit
sparsity and data parallelism. We evaluate SmoothE on a
variety of realistic e-graphs from five different applications
using three distinct cost models, including both linear and
non-linear ones. Our experiments demonstrate that SmoothE
consistently achieves a favorable trade-off between scalability and solution quality.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707262

CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Machine
learning; • Software and its engineering → Compilers;
General programming languages.
Keywords: Machine learning for systems; Compilers; Programming languages; Equivalence graph
ACM Reference Format:
Yaohui Cai, Kaixin Yang, Chenhui Deng, Cunxi Yu, and Zhiru Zhang.
2025. SmoothE: Differentiable E-Graph Extraction. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707262

1

Introduction

Term rewriting [17], widely employed in compiler optimizations [8, 34, 44] and theorem proving [15, 18], transforms programs into functionally equivalent but more efficient forms.
Traditional methods apply the rewrites sequentially in a
predetermined order, significantly affecting performance—a
challenge known as the phase ordering problem [44, 50].
Equality saturation addresses the phase ordering issue
by using the equivalence graph (e-graph), a data structure
that compactly represents a set of expressions (i.e., e-nodes)
and their equivalence relations (i.e., e-classes) [6, 33]. The
rewrite rules are applied collectively, encoding all functionally equivalent solutions on a single e-graph. This enables
the selection of the most cost-efficient (or performant) one
during the e-graph extraction process. With the emergence of
state-of-the-art open-source equality saturation tools such as
egg [50] and egglog [56], e-graph has been successfully used
for tensor graph transformation [53], sparse linear algebra
optimization [49], code optimization [29, 41], digital signal
processor (DSP) compilation [45, 48], circuit datapath synthesis [10, 12–14, 47], and floating-point arithmetic [11, 35].
Extracting a high-quality solution from an e-graph is challenging due to theoretical complexity (proven to be NPhard [42, 55] in general) and practical efficiency, particularly given the typically large graph size. While a number of
exact and heuristic e-graph extraction methods have been

