Energy-aware Scheduling and Input Buffer Overflow
Prevention for Energy-harvesting Systems
Harsh Desai

Xinye Wang

Brandon Lucia

harshd@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA

xinyew@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA

blucia@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
Modern energy-harvesting devices [23] use on-device compute to discard data uninteresting to the application, improving energy availability. These devices capture data at fixed
rate, and process captured data at a rate that varies with
environmental factors like input power and event activity. If
capture rate exceeds processing rate, new inputs are stored
in a small on-device input buffer (hundreds of kBs). When
the input buffer fills up, the device discards newer inputs,
missing potentially interesting events. Energy-harvesting devices must avoid such input buffer overflows (IBO) to avoid
missing interesting events. A static solution to IBOs is impossible given dynamic variations in processing rate, and prior
research fails to provide a suitable dynamic solution. We
propose Quetzal, a new hardware-software solution targeted
at avoiding IBOs. Quetzal’s software has two parts: a new
energy-aware scheduler that selects jobs with the lowest endto-end latency (including energy recharging), and a runtime
which uses queueing-theory to predict if the selected job will
cause IBOs. Quetzal reacts to imminent IBOs by degrading
the scheduled job. Quetzal’s scheduler and runtime use a
simple, system-agnostic hardware circuit to measure power
at runtime. Quetzal reduces events missed due to IBOs by
up to 4.2× compared to several baselines.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Embedded software; Embedded hardware; Sensor networks;
• Hardware → Sensor applications and deployments; Sensor
devices and platforms; • Mathematics of computing →
Queueing theory.
Keywords: energy-harvesting devices; input-buffer overflows;
intermittent computing; energy-aware scheduling
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1079-7/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3715995

ACM Reference Format:
Harsh Desai, Xinye Wang, and Brandon Lucia. 2025. Energy-aware
Scheduling and Input Buffer Overflow Prevention for Energy-harvesting
Systems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’25), March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3715995

1

Introduction

Energy-harvesting devices enable scalable, affordable and
environmentally-safe deployments in applications like wildlife
tracking and city surveillance. These devices replace bulky,
expensive, and poisonous batteries with energy harvesters
to collect clean environmental energy (e.g. solar, RF). Typical
energy-harvesting devices have sensors (e.g. camera), a compute core (e.g. microcontroller) and peripherals (e.g. radio),
all powered through energy harvested and stored in a small
supercapacitor. Figure 1 shows an example device operation
(like [23]), periodically capturing image data. While earlier
devices transmitted every input, recent works [23, 31, 46]
use on-device compute to identify inputs ‘interesting‘ to
the application. Such devices transmit fewer uninteresting
inputs, recovering energy and wireless bandwidth for interesting inputs. The example above uses a cheap-discarding
step to eliminate images that are definitely uninteresting (e.g.
empty background), storing the rest in a input buffer to be
processed further. The stored images are then evaluated for
‘interesting‘-ness using complex processing (e.g. ML); the
radio transmits images deemed ‘interesting‘.
Problem Overview: If the device processes images slower
than the storing rate, the input buffer starts to fill up. Since
energy-harvesting devices have severely limited memory
(few hundred KBs), the input buffer easily overflows. Once
the input buffer is full, the device cannot store new data, missing events and reducing sensing effectiveness. Therefore, it
is critical to prevent the input buffer from overflowing.
Challenge: Statically avoiding input buffer overflows (IBOs)
is challenging since processing time varies dynamically. Endto-end processing time in energy-harvesting devices varies
due to two main reasons: input power and event activity. Input power causes energy-recharging time to vary, in turn controlling end-to-end processing [22]. On-device processing
draws energy from a supercapacitor; if the supercapacitor discharges below a threshold, the device must wait to recharge

