arXiv:2407.12232v1 [cs.AR] 17 Jul 2024

RTL Verification for Secure Speculation Using
Contract Shadow Logic
Qinhan Tan∗

Yuheng Yang∗

Thomas Bourgeat

qinhant@princeton.edu
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA

yuhengy@mit.edu
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, Massachusett, USA

thomas.bourgeat@epfl.ch
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Sharad Malik

Mengjia Yan

sharad@princeton.edu
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA

mengjiay@mit.edu
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, Massachusett, USA
seems to pose a Sisyphean challenge. For example, Foreshadow [58] identified the L1TF vulnerability, showcasing cross-domain leakage of data residing in the L1 cache.
Though the L1TF vulnerability was quickly patched by Intel
by flushing L1 data cache upon context switch [32], such
mitigation was insufficient to block small variations of the
attack, due to the existence of various other structures inside
the L1, including the line fill buffer, the store buffer, the load
port, etc. These structures were exploited to leak information
by a batch of follow-on attacks called Microarchitecture Data
Sampling Attacks (MDS) [51, 60]. The cat-and-mouse game
described above calls for rigorous approaches to ensure the
security of processors.
To this end, this paper aims to develop a formal verification
scheme for secure speculation on out-of-order processors
working at the Register Transfer Level (RTL). As hardware
design is a lengthy procedure and involves multiple steps,
including early-stage high-level modeling and later-stage
Register Transfer Level (RTL) implementation, we need verification tools at each stage to offer security guarantees. Several prior work, such as Pensieve [72], CheckMate [56], and
in Guarnieri et al. [26], focus on higher-level abstract models
to assist security verification at early design stage. However,
higher-level models are prone to overlooking small but crucial processor structures, like the buffers exploited by the
MDS attacks. Thus, we aim to design verification tools that
can operate at the RTL level at a later design stage when
all microarchitectural details are in place. We envision our
tool can work complementarily with existing early-stage
verification tools for the whole hardware design flow.

Abstract
Modern out-of-order processors face speculative execution
attacks. Despite various proposed software and hardware
mitigations to prevent such attacks, new attacks keep arising
from unknown vulnerabilities. Thus, a formal and rigorous
evaluation of the ability of hardware designs to deal with
speculative execution attacks is urgently desired.
This paper proposes a formal verification technique called
Contract Shadow Logic that can considerably improve RTL
verification scalability while being applicable to different
defense mechanisms. In this technique, we leverage computer architecture design insights to improve verification
performance for checking security properties formulated
as software-hardware contracts for secure speculation. Our
verification scheme is accessible to computer architects and
requires minimal formal-method expertise.
We evaluate our technique on multiple RTL designs, including three out-of-order processors. The experimental results demonstrate that our technique exhibits a significant
advantage in finding attacks on insecure designs and deriving complete proofs on secure designs, when compared to
the baseline and two state-of-the-art verification schemes,
LEAVE and UPEC.

1

Introduction

Speculative execution in modern out-of-order (OoO) processors has given rise to various speculative execution attacks, including Spectre [36], Meltdown [39], L1TF [32], and
LVI [59]. These attacks exploit the microarchitectural side
effects of transient instructions, i.e., the instructions that are
executed speculatively due to misspeculation and squashed
later. Prior work has demonstrated that speculative execution
attacks can leak secrets via a wide range of microarchitectural structures, including caches [35–37], TLBs [25], branch
predictors [17] and functional units [8].
Even worse, as the microarchitecture becomes ever more
complex, anticipating speculative execution vulnerabilities

1.1

Blueprint for Systematic and Scalable RTL
Security Verification

Existing RTL formal verification schemes for secure speculation pose scalability challenges. Most techniques only work
effectively on simple designs such as in-order processors,
but struggle to cope with architecturally complex designs
like out-of-order processors, leading to timeout. Making a

∗ Two co-first authors contributed equally to this research.

1

