arXiv:2407.12232v1 [cs.AR] 17 Jul 2024

RTL Verification for Secure Speculation Using
Contract Shadow Logic
Qinhan Tan∗

Yuheng Yang∗

Thomas Bourgeat

qinhant@princeton.edu
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA

yuhengy@mit.edu
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, Massachusett, USA

thomas.bourgeat@epfl.ch
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Sharad Malik

Mengjia Yan

sharad@princeton.edu
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA

mengjiay@mit.edu
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, Massachusett, USA
seems to pose a Sisyphean challenge. For example, Foreshadow [58] identified the L1TF vulnerability, showcasing cross-domain leakage of data residing in the L1 cache.
Though the L1TF vulnerability was quickly patched by Intel
by flushing L1 data cache upon context switch [32], such
mitigation was insufficient to block small variations of the
attack, due to the existence of various other structures inside
the L1, including the line fill buffer, the store buffer, the load
port, etc. These structures were exploited to leak information
by a batch of follow-on attacks called Microarchitecture Data
Sampling Attacks (MDS) [51, 60]. The cat-and-mouse game
described above calls for rigorous approaches to ensure the
security of processors.
To this end, this paper aims to develop a formal verification
scheme for secure speculation on out-of-order processors
working at the Register Transfer Level (RTL). As hardware
design is a lengthy procedure and involves multiple steps,
including early-stage high-level modeling and later-stage
Register Transfer Level (RTL) implementation, we need verification tools at each stage to offer security guarantees. Several prior work, such as Pensieve [72], CheckMate [56], and
in Guarnieri et al. [26], focus on higher-level abstract models
to assist security verification at early design stage. However,
higher-level models are prone to overlooking small but crucial processor structures, like the buffers exploited by the
MDS attacks. Thus, we aim to design verification tools that
can operate at the RTL level at a later design stage when
all microarchitectural details are in place. We envision our
tool can work complementarily with existing early-stage
verification tools for the whole hardware design flow.

Abstract
Modern out-of-order processors face speculative execution
attacks. Despite various proposed software and hardware
mitigations to prevent such attacks, new attacks keep arising
from unknown vulnerabilities. Thus, a formal and rigorous
evaluation of the ability of hardware designs to deal with
speculative execution attacks is urgently desired.
This paper proposes a formal verification technique called
Contract Shadow Logic that can considerably improve RTL
verification scalability while being applicable to different
defense mechanisms. In this technique, we leverage computer architecture design insights to improve verification
performance for checking security properties formulated
as software-hardware contracts for secure speculation. Our
verification scheme is accessible to computer architects and
requires minimal formal-method expertise.
We evaluate our technique on multiple RTL designs, including three out-of-order processors. The experimental results demonstrate that our technique exhibits a significant
advantage in finding attacks on insecure designs and deriving complete proofs on secure designs, when compared to
the baseline and two state-of-the-art verification schemes,
LEAVE and UPEC.

1

Introduction

Speculative execution in modern out-of-order (OoO) processors has given rise to various speculative execution attacks, including Spectre [36], Meltdown [39], L1TF [32], and
LVI [59]. These attacks exploit the microarchitectural side
effects of transient instructions, i.e., the instructions that are
executed speculatively due to misspeculation and squashed
later. Prior work has demonstrated that speculative execution
attacks can leak secrets via a wide range of microarchitectural structures, including caches [35–37], TLBs [25], branch
predictors [17] and functional units [8].
Even worse, as the microarchitecture becomes ever more
complex, anticipating speculative execution vulnerabilities

1.1

Blueprint for Systematic and Scalable RTL
Security Verification

Existing RTL formal verification schemes for secure speculation pose scalability challenges. Most techniques only work
effectively on simple designs such as in-order processors,
but struggle to cope with architecturally complex designs
like out-of-order processors, leading to timeout. Making a

∗ Two co-first authors contributed equally to this research.

1

verification scheme work on an out-of-order processor requires the verification engineer to spend significant manual
effort to customize security specifications of subcomponents
and try to find invariants that help the unbounded proof to
go through. This process is very challenging, especially as
it requires the engineers to have security expertise and indepth knowledge of formal methods, computer architecture,
and the specifics of the design studied. Moreover, the verification harness that works on one design cannot be easily
transferred to another design without requiring new creative
insights.
For example, the state-of-the-art verification work
UPEC [20] successfully proves a secure speculation scheme
on BOOM [76], highlighting a breakthrough along this research direction.1 However, a careful examination of their
scheme shows that the verification methodology is depending on the specific conservative defense mechanism being
verified (which is to prevent speculative load instructions to
execute before all preceding branch instructions in the ROB
are resolved). To verify other defenses such as DoM [49] and
STT [73], a UPEC user will face extensive challenges and
need to invest additional effort to extend the set of invariants.
Alternatively, recent work (LEAVE [65]) proposed to reduce the amount of manual effort needed for RTL verification of secure speculation schemes using automatic invariant
search techniques. Those techniques demonstrated great effectiveness on certain in-order pipelined processors, however
we found that the approach tends to have a hard time on
simple out-of-order processors (Section 7.1).
To summarize, the primary research challenge here is to
improve verification scalability to more evolved architectures
and reduce the amount of manual and non-reusable efforts
required to complete the RTL security verification.
In this paper, we try to make progress towards reusable
and more scalable verification schemes by leveraging computer architecture insights. Our verification approach gets
the computer architects who design the processor involved
in the formal verification loop: we are asking them to design
the shadow logic machinery instrumental to our verification
task, from which we can call the verification tools to formally
check the security property. Compared to writing logical invariants, writing this shadow logic machinery is a task much
closer to the standard activity of computer architects.
1.2

We refer to the operation that checks the software against
a constraint as the contract constraint check, and refer
to the operation that checks the hardware for detecting information leakage as the leakage assertion check. Each of
the two checks is performed on a pair of state machines (or
machines for short). The contract constraint check compares
the executions of two simple machines which implement the
ISA and execute each instruction in one-cycle (henceforth
referred to as single-cycle machines or ISA machines). Similarly the leakage assertion check compares the executions of
two copies of the out-of-order processor to check for secret
leakage. The baseline verification scheme examines the four
state machines cycle by cycle.
We propose a verification scheme, called Contract Shadow
Logic. The key insight is that we can perform both the contract
constraint check and the leakage assertion check on a single
pair of out-of-order machines, and thus eliminate the pair of
single-cycle machines in the verification scheme. Specifically,
assuming the out-of-order processor is correctly implementing the ISA semantics, the single-cycle machine’s execution
trace can be recovered from the out-of-order processor’s
committed instruction sequences. We implement this ISA
trace extraction mechanism as shadow logic (which is added
to assist verification, does not interfere with the original
design, and can be safely removed before synthesis).
We have implemented our verification scheme using the
commercial RTL verification tool, JasperGold [10] and use
it to verify one in-order processor, three out-of-order processors, and five defense augmentations. We provide experimental results to compare our scheme with the baseline
and two state-of-the-art verification schemes, LEAVE [65]
and UPEC [20]. Through our results, we demonstrate the following: First, across all secure designs, the baseline scheme
cannot provide any security proofs within 7 days, while,
our scheme can prove the security for all of them. Second,
while LEAVE cannot automatically find bugs or prove security for our in-house simplified out-of-order processor,
our new scheme is able to do so. Third, we show the ability
of our method to find attacks arising from different misspeculation sources on the BOOM [76] processor, while
UPEC can only detect attacks caused by pre-identified misspeculation sources. However, we would like to point out that
scalability continues to be a challenge in formally verifying
secure speculation of hardware designs, and one will need
additional architectural insights to assist formal verification
to scale to more complex out-of-order processors.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

This Paper: Contract Shadow Logic

The security property to be checked in secure speculation is
expressed as a software-hardware contract [14, 26], which
states, “if a software program satisfies a constraint, then
the hardware ensures executing the program will not leak
secrets.” Checking this statement involves two operations.

1. We propose a verification scheme, called Contract Shadow
Logic. Our scheme leverages computer architecture insights to improve the scalability of RTL security verification for secure speculation while maintaining broad
applicability (Section 4).

1 There are multiple versions of UPEC dealing with different security is-

sues [19, 50]. In this paper, unless otherwise stated, we refer to [20] which
tackles speculative vulnerabilities in RTL implementations.

2

2. We identify two important requirements to construct correct shadow logic for checking software-hardware contracts (Section 5).
3. We demonstrate the efficacy of our scheme on four processors and conduct a detailed comparison to showcase
the advantages of our scheme compared to the baseline
and two state-of-the-art verification schemes, i.e., LEAVE
and UPEC (Section 7).

2

Background

2.1

Speculative Execution Attacks and Defenses

′
∀𝑃, 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐
,

if

′
then 𝑂 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ (𝑃, 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 ) = 𝑂 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ (𝑃, 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐
)

(1)
The formula states that when running a program 𝑃 with
public memory 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 and secret memory 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 on a microarchitecture processor 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ, if the program 𝑃 satisfies an
indistinguishability software observation denoted by 𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 ,
then the actual observation when executed on the hardware
denoted as 𝑂 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ remains indistinguishable.
Note that Eq. (1) does not describe a single contract but
a family of contracts. The equation is parameterized by different execution modes at the software level and different
observation functions. The scheme proposed in this paper
supports the sequential execution mode where the software
constraint considers traces when executing the program
sequentially (i.e., not speculatively). For example, under a
so-called sandboxing contract, the software constraint is
that executing the program sequentially will not have secrets loaded into the register file. The 𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 of sandboxing
includes the data written to registers of every committed
load. In contrast, in the constant-time programming contract, the software constraint is that executing the program
sequentially will not use secrets as addresses of instruction
or data memory accesses or as operands to hardware modules whose timing depends on the input. This matches the
constant-time programming discipline [26]. The 𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 of this
contract includes the branch condition, memory address and
multiplication operands of committed instructions.
The microarchitecture observation (𝑂 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ ) considered in
this paper includes the address sequence at the memory bus
and the commit time of every committed instruction, which
is commonly used in prior works [46, 72] to reflect cache
and timing side channels.

Speculative execution attacks exploit the microarchitectural
side effects of transient instructions. Transient instructions
can be introduced via a wide range of speculation features,
including branch history prediction [35], branch target prediction [36], return address prediction [37, 41], store-to-load
forwarding [27], value prediction [61], and 4K aliasing [11].
The side effects of transient instructions are diverse, including modifying the cache states [35–37, 39, 41], TLBs [25],
Line Fill Buffer [51], and DRAMs [55].
Speculative execution vulnerabilities can be mitigated via
software and hardware methods. In software, existing mitigations typically involve placing fence instructions after
sensitive branch instructions to delay the execution of the
subsequent instructions until the branch is resolved [3, 33].
Other software approaches involve replacing branch instructions with cmov instructions and using bit masking of the index used for array lookups [12]. Hardware mitigation mechanisms focus on restricting speculative execution by either
selectively delaying the execution of instructions that can
potentially transmit secrets via side channels [40, 49, 67, 73]
or making it difficult for attackers to observe the microarchitectural side effects of speculative instructions [1, 2, 34, 71].

2.3
2.2

′
𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 (𝑃, 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 ) = 𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 (𝑃, 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 , 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐
)

RTL Verification using Model Checking

Model checking is widely used in verifying hardware designs,
including processors [7] and accelerators [29]. It is available
as both open-source tools (e.g., AVR [24]) and commercial
tools (e.g., Cadence Jaspergold [10]) that directly work on
RTL designs. These tools are highly automated, where the
user only needs to provide the hardware source code instrumented with the property to be checked. Existing tools have
flexible support to express various properties via instrumenting hardware code using a design-friendly language, e.g.,
System Verilog Assertions (SVA). SVA allows specifying (i)
assumptions (using the assume keyword) that describe system assumptions such as constraints on the inputs and (ii)
assertions (using the assert keyword) to specify the property that the model checker is required to check, similar to
assertions in C/Python.

SW-HW Contracts for Secure Speculation

As speculative execution vulnerabilities can be mitigated via
either software or hardware methods, it becomes challenging
to cleanly and explicitly reason about security properties
a defense should achieve. The community has been using
software-hardware contracts to define security properties
precisely related to speculative execution vulnerabilities.
Guarnieri et al. [26] proposed the first set of formalized
contracts by defining which program executions a side channel adversary can distinguish. Specifically, a contract states
that: “if a program satisfies a specified software constraint,
then the hardware needs to achieve a noninterference
property to ensure no secrets are being leaked.” Formally, a
contract can be written as follows:
3

ROB

Commit

ID

ID

MEM
ROB

ID

ROB
FU

MEM

Contract
Constraint
Check

𝑂!"#$%

Leakage
Assertion
Check

Leakage
Assertion
Check

𝑂()"
IF

𝑂!"#$%

(a) Baseline

ID

ROB
FU

Commit

IF

IF

𝑂!"#$%

𝑂()"

𝑂𝑜𝑂'

𝑂𝑜𝑂&
𝑂𝑜𝑂'

IF

MEM

FU
𝑂𝑜𝑂&

𝑂()"

1-cycle
Processor

Contract
Constraint
Check

Commit

𝐼𝑆𝐴 '

𝑂()"

FU

𝑂!"#$%

MEM

(b) Contract Shadow Logic

Figure 1. Overview of Contract Shadow Logic.
access the secret region. The attacker’s goal is to infer
any secret value through microarchitectural side-channel
attacks. Non-digital side-channel attacks, such as power
side channels [42, 63], are out of the scope.
2. The system runs a program that satisfies certain software
constraints. These constraints prevent the secret from
being leaked via ISA state. For example, at the ISA level,
the program cannot load secret data into registers (in the
sandboxing contract), or it needs to follow the constanttime programming discipline.
3. The attacker is able to gain cycle-level observation of certain micro-architectural variables in the system, including
the address sequence transmitted on the memory bus and
the commit time of instructions.

2.4 Shadow Logic
When verifying complex RTL code, it is often necessary to
introduce auxiliary code to assist verification by obtaining
or deriving extra information from the current state of the
system. Such auxiliary code is called shadow logic (or ghost
code in software verification [38]). This logic monitors the
design and assumes and asserts that certain conditions hold.
For example, consider a verification task that checks
whether a processor correctly implements its ISA specification. For every instruction that updates the register file,
we need to check that when the instruction commits, the
target register holds the value specified by the ISA. However,
due to complex renaming logic in out-of-order processors,
it is a nontrivial task to determine which register in the
physical register file is the target register. Prior work [48]
customizes shadow logic according to the renaming logic to
correctly locate the target register as part of this checking.
It is important that this shadow logic only monitors the
design and does not make any modifications that change the
behavior of the system. It is common practice to implement
shadow logic for verification purposes under some macro.
This enables this logic to be stripped out during design compilation and thus, shadow logic is not present in the final
production RTL.

3

All Programs

1-cycle
Processor

Commit

𝐼𝑆𝐴&

As model checking effectively considers all possible input
sequences which can be of unbounded length, it provides
an unbounded-length proof or a complete proof. When the
property does not hold at some reachable state, model checking reports an input-sequence trace, a counterexample, for
which the property fails. Bounded model checking (BMC)
can be used to perform verification for all possible input sequences of length bounded by some user-provided parameter
𝑘 - this effectively checks the property for all states reachable
within 𝑘 steps from the initial state which is obviously not
as strong as an unbounded-length proof.
The information leakage security property is a hyperproperty, i.e., it needs reasoning over two traces (corresponding
to two different values of the secret) to prove or disprove
it. This can be handled by constructing a model checking
instance with two copies of the design (with different values
of the secret), and constructing a property comparing traces
over the two copies.

4

Motivation and Insights

In this section, we describe the insights that motivate the
design of our verification scheme. We start by presenting
a baseline verification scheme for secure speculation and
we analyze the performance bottlenecks encountered. We
then point out the optimization insight that is architecturefriendly and leads us to the design of Contract Shadow Logic.
4.1

The Baseline Verification Scheme

Verifying the software-hardware contract described in Section 2.2 requires performing two kinds of equivalence checks
that involve four traces. The equivalence check at line 2 in
Eq. (1) is the contract constraint check to determine whether a
program 𝑃 needs to be protected (we say that 𝑃 is valid). The
equivalence check at line 3 is the leakage assertion check to
determine whether the microarchitecture processor 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ
has a correct defense mechanism for the given program.
The security property (Eq. (1)) can be tentatively verified
using the scheme visualized in Fig. 1(a). First, two copies of
a single-cycle machine are instantiated as two separate RTL
modules. The two modules have identical RTL code with
the instruction memory and public data memory initialized
with the same content (𝑃 and 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 ) and different secret
memory (𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 ), i.e., two secret memories differ in at least
one location. The two instances of single-cycle machines

Threat Model

Recall from Section 2.2, security properties for secure speculation can be formulated as software-hardware contracts.
Such contracts explicitly state the responsibilities of the
software and the hardware sides to achieve an overall noninterference property [18]. In this paper, we consider the
following threat model.
1. We assume a system whose data memory is split into
two parts: public and secret. An attacker cannot directly
4

execute instructions sequentially, finishing one instruction
per cycle. These two copies execute in a lock-step manner,
allowing the verification scheme to derive the 𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 trace at
each cycle and compare them for equivalence to enforce the
contract constraint check. The comparison results serve as a
constraint to filter out invalid programs for the out-of-order
processor being verified. The model checker will discard the
programs that generate the traces violating the constraint.
Similarly, the RTL for the out-of-order processor is duplicated to create two instances, which only differ in the secret
memory. The program memory 𝑃 and the initial value of the
public data memory 𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 are the same as in the single-cycle
machine. The verification scheme compares the microarchitecture execution traces 𝑂 𝜇𝐴𝑟𝑐ℎ from the two machines at
each cycle for the leakage assertion check.
This scheme runs the contract constraint check and leakage assertion check in parallel at each cycle, allowing for
conducting both bounded and unbounded checking.
4.2

shadow logic correctly verify software-hardware contracts,
and finally provide our solution adressing these challenges.
5.1 Shadow Logic to Extract ISA Traces
An important task of the shadow logic is to monitor the
commit stage of the out-of-order processor and extract information for every committed instruction to derive the ISA
trace. The shadow logic needs to be implemented according
to the observation function (𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 ). For example, if checking for the constant-time contract, the contract constraint
check needs to compare the addresses of committed memory
access instructions and the condition values of committed
branch instructions. Different processor implementations
may store this information in different places. In the best
case, the information is already present in the ROB and can
be directly obtained.
In more complex cases, the information may be spread
across multiple modules, such as inside the register files and
load/store queues, and in some cases the information might
not even be readily available at commit-time anymore. This
is the place where we can leverage and involve the architect’s
knowledge and expertise. Specifically, to handle these cases,
the user needs to extend the existing ROB structure with
shadow metadata state to record the information needed to
reconstruct the ISA trace. For example, instead of extracting
this information from across modules, we can record the
opcode type with the instruction when it enters the ROB and
its operand values when it finishes execution. If the instruction commits later, we can directly obtain the information
for the contract constraint check.
Nonetheless, even though the shadow logic needs to be
customized for different processor designs, the task of deriving shadow logic to extract ISA traces is straightforward for
the processor designers to carry out. We think this presents
an important advantage of our scheme compared to related
work, as our scheme can get the designers involved in the
verification loop and make the formal tools more accessible
to architects. Moreover, our verification scheme is reusable
across different design variations, defenses and contracts, as
we only need to swap in different ISA trace extraction logic
without requiring to search for new invariants as needed by
existing work.
Remarkably, there’s a scenario where no additional engineering effort is required for tackling different designs.
Imagine a hardware designer integrating security measures
like STT and DoM onto an initially insecure processor. The
shadow logic, initially integrated for the insecure design,
seamlessly transfers to the secure design without alteration.
Indeed, all the necessary signals for the shadow logic remain intact within the processor when adding the defense
mechanism. We use this observation in Section 7.2, where
we assess different defense schemes employing precisely the
same shadow logic.

Architecture-driven Insights for Verification

As discussed in Section 1, the community faces serious challenges in coming up with verification schemes that are both
reusable for verifying different defense designs and, meanwhile, scalable enough to be able to verify out-of-order processors. In this paper, we aim to tackle the research challenge
of designing a reusable verification scheme while achieving
reasonable scalability, where the verification scheme can
handle some out-of-order processors without requiring to
come up with custom inductive invariants. A baseline verification scheme employs four state machines (for the four processors) which entails a non-trivial amount of redundancy
among them, we aim to explore the possibility of reducing
this redundancy.
As mentioned in Section 1, if an out-of-order processor
functionally correctly implements its ISA specification, the
ISA trace can be reconstructed from the out-of-order processor’s committed instruction sequence. In other words,
the single-cycle machine is contained in the out-of-order
machine, including the complex instruction decoding, the
execution logic, as well as registers/memory state. This insight leads to our verification scheme, introducing shadow
logic to implement the contract constraint check directly
on the out-of-order processors, as shown in Fig. 1(b). With
this, we can reduce a four-machine verification problem (the
baseline) to a two-machine problem with some additional
shadow logic – this reduction in logic could potentially lead
to better scalability.

5

Contract Shadow Logic

In this section, we present the main components of Contract
Shadow Logic. We first describe the basic component of our
shadow logic that extracts the ISA traces from out-of-order
processors. We then discuss the challenges in making the
5

5.2

However, comparing at each cycle the new elements of
the ISA traces derived from the two out-of-order processors
will not be an equivalent check. This is because the out-oforder machines might run out of synchronization when the
two processors commit their instructions at different time.
Consider the case when the two processors try to commit
a load instruction with different addresses, which can happen because of different values of the secret. One of the
processors commits the load in one cycle as the load hits
the L1 cache, while the other processor suffers a cache miss
and commits the load after the result returns from DRAM,
potentially after a hundred cycles. Because the instruction
commits at different cycles, the ISA trace derived from the
first processor is no longer cycle-aligned with the ISA trace
derived from the second processor.
Solution To perform the same check for the contract constraint check in the baseline scheme, we first need to realign the derived ISA traces. We achieve this by introducing
shadow logic to the second phase of our verification scheme
to synchronize the out-of-order processors to commit instructions at the same speed.

Challenges: Two Requirements

Enforcing the contract constraint check needs comparing
two ISA-level traces. However, naively introducing shadow
logic to extract committed instruction information is insufficient to verify software-hardware contracts since it will
violate what we name the instruction inclusion requirement and the synchronization requirement.
5.2.1 Instruction Inclusion Requirement. Recall from
Eq. (1): the contract constraint check and the leakage assertion check examine the same program 𝑃. This leads to the
instruction inclusion requirement: “if an instruction’s microarchitecture side effects have been considered in the leakage
assertion check and it will eventually commit, this instruction
must also be examined by the contract constraint check.”
The baseline verification scheme assumes the out-of-order
processor fetches at most one instruction per cycle and the
ISA processor executes one instruction per cycle. The instruction inclusion requirement is automatically fulfilled as the
ISA processor is always running ahead of the out-of-order
processor.
However, when switching to our optimized verification
scheme, enforcing the instruction inclusion requirement requires additional work. Indeed, intuitively, in the out-oforder machines, the contract constraint check is checked
at commit time, because the contract constraint check only
examines committed instructions. This is a bit behind the
leakage assertion check, meaning we may miss the instructions that are still in their execution or even the fetch stage.
Thus, we need to make sure that any violation of the leakage
assertion check is not related to a failure of contract constraint check that has not occurred yet, i.e., the violation of
the leakage assertion check is not for a program that should
have been filtered out by the contract constraint check.
Solution Our solution to enforce the instruction inclusion
requirement is to structure the verification logic into two
phases. In the first phase, we perform the contract constraint
check and leakage assertion check on a pair of out-of-order
processors cycle by cycle. Upon detecting microarchitecture
trace deviation, we switch to the second phase, where the
contract constraint check is applied to all the inflight and
bound-to-commit instructions in the pipeline, satisfying the
instruction inclusive requirement.

1 cpu
2 cpu

cpu1 (. clk ( pause1 ? 0: clk ), . rst ( rst ));
cpu2 (. clk ( pause2 ? 0: clk ), . rst ( rst ));

3
4 always
5
6
7

@( posedge clk ) begin
// shadow logic to compare traces
uarch_diff = ( O_uarch ( cpu1 )!= O_uarch ( cpu2 ));
isa_diff
= ( O_ISA ( cpu1 ) != O_ISA ( cpu2 ));

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

// phase -1
initial uarch_diff_phase1 <= 0;
if ( uarch_diff_phase1 ==0 && uarch_diff ) then
uarch_diff_phase1 <= 1;
tail1 <= cpu1 . tail ;
tail2 <= cpu2 . tail ;
endif

16
17
18
19
20
21

// phase -2
if uarch_diff_phase1 then
// Requirement 1: inst inclusion
drained = ( tail1 == cpu1 . head -1) &&
( tail2 == cpu2 . head -1);

22
23
24
25
26

5.2.2 Synchronization Requirement. In the baseline
verification scheme, for each pair of machines, the two machines in the pair execute in a lock-step manner. Hence, the
scheme can perform both the contract constraint check and
the leakage assertion check by comparing the corresponding
states in each pair at each cycle. Because the ISA machine
executes exactly one instruction per cycle, the check on ISA
traces (𝑂 𝐼𝑆𝐴 ) is equivalent to comparing states instruction
after instruction.

27
28
29
30
31

// Requirement 2: realign ISA traces
if ( cpu1 . commit == cpu2 . commit )
pause1 <= 0;
pause2 <= 0;
else if ( cpu1 . commit )
pause1 <= 1;
else if ( cpu2 . commit )
pause2 <= 1;
endif

32
33
34
35
36

6

// contract assumption check
assume ( isa_diff ==0);
// leakage assertion check
assert (!( uarch_diff_phase1 && drained ));

but will introduce distinguishable microarchitecture traces
running on the cpu;
2) the model checker declares a successful unbounded proof
to indicate the processor under verification does satisfy
the software-hardware contract for unbounded number
of cycles;
3) the model check hits a scalability bottleneck and cannot produce a result within a reasonable amount of time,
which we refer to as “time out.”

37 end

Listing 1. Verilog-Style Pseudo-code for Shadow Logic.

5.3 Solution: Two-Phase Shadow Logic
Listing 1 shows the pseudocode of our two-phase shadow
logic written in Verilog style. Given an out-of-order processor to be verified, we create two instances of the processor,
named cpu1 and cpu2 (lines 1-2). We then introduce shadow
logic to drive and monitor the microarchitecture traces and
ISA traces of the two instances cycle by cycle (lines 5-7).
The remaining shadow logic uses the trace comparison results and operates differently in two phases. In Phase 1, upon
a microarchitecture trace deviation, we record the deviation
by setting the variable uarch_diff_phase1 to true and also
record the tail of the ROB of each cpu instance. The goal of
recording the tail is to assist the shadow logic in Phase 2 to
determine when the contract constraint check is completed
to satisfy the instruction inclusion requirement.
In Phase 2, since a microarchitecture trace deviation has already happened, the responsibility of the remaining shadow
logic is to ensure the contract constraint check is sound,
satisfying both the instruction inclusion requirement and
the synchronization requirement. Specifically, the shadow
logic tracks whether the two instances have committed the
instruction that was recorded at the end of Phase 1 (lines
19-21). Note that the actual shadow logic implementation
also accounts for the case when the recorded tail is squashed
due to mis-speculation, which we do not show in Listing 1
for brevity. Besides, the shadow logic also re-aligns the ISA
observation traces whenever the two instances go out of
synchronization. The re-alignment operation is achieved by
manipulating the input clk signal to the two cpu instances,
involving no code modifications inside the cpu code (see
lines 23-30 and how pause is used in lines 1-2).
Note that the re-alignment operation only happens in
Phase 2 because the commit signal is included in the 𝑂 𝜇𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ
trace, which is a common practice in contracts targeting
timing side channels. This example shows a machine (the
cpu instance) with one clock domain. In the case that the
machine has multiple clock domains, e.g., using different
clocks for the processor and caches, all the clocks need to be
paused and resumed simultaneously.
Finally, we use SVA to explicitly express the contract constraint check and leakage assertion check in lines 33-36.
Model Checking with Contract Shadow Logic Given the
cpu state machines and the shadow logic, model-checking
techniques check for all possible input states that satisfy
the assumption (𝑀𝑝𝑢𝑏 and 𝑀𝑠𝑒𝑐 ) and answer the question
whether any of the input states can trigger the assertions.
We expect three possible outcomes:

Validity of the Synchronization Operation As discussed
in Section 2.4, shadow logic should only passively monitor
operations and never modify the design under verification.
However, the shadow logic we introduce does have a limited
influence on the design when the “pause” signal freezes the
clock. Strictly speaking, this logic is no longer just monitoring the design. We claim our shadow logic is still valid for
two reasons. First, the shadow logic performs the “pause”
operation in Phase 2. At the beginning of Phase 2, the timingdependent microarchitectural traces deviation has already
been detected, thus Phase 2 only focuses on comparing traces
of committed instructions, i.e. ISA traces, which only involve
the execution results of committed instructions and does
not include any microarchitectural timing information. Second, the “pause” signal only freezes the clock signal of the
processor and thus does not affect the execution results of
committed instructions. Thus, it will not influence the ISA
traces, nor will it affect the ISA trace comparison results.
Supporting Superscalar Processors The pseudocode in
Listing 1 assumes the processor commits maximally one
instruction at a cycle. Our scheme can be adapted for superscalar processors, where multiple instructions can be
committed at each cycle. The problem that we need to tackle
is that the pausing granularity is determined by how many
instructions the processor commits. We will need to add
shadow logic to break the atomicity of contract constraint
check by supporting partial ISA trace comparison at each
cycle and the capability to remember unaligned traces for future comparison. This approach introduces minimal shadow
state overhead as the number of entries for memorizing
unmatched ISA traces only needs to match the commit bandwidth of the processor. It is constant regardless of the ISA
trace length. However, the complexity of the logic increases
with the commit bandwidth because we need to align traces
across neighboring cycles.
5.4

Discussion

Verification Gap. Our verification scheme reformulates the
contract property in Equation 1 and can potentially introduce
a verification gap. Our proof is conditioned upon the ISA
traces stated as the hypothesis in Equation 1 matching the
ISA traces extracted from the out-of-order processors, which
in turn requires the following assumptions to be satisfied: 1)
the shadow logic is assumed to be implemented correctly;

1) the model checker finds a counterexample, which reassembles an attack code that satisfies the software constraints
7

Open-source in-order processor
ISA: the full suite of RV32I
Sodor Configuration: 2-stage pipeline, 1-cycle memory
[15]
Code size: 700 lines of Chisel (2,700 lines of Verilog)
∼90 lines of Verilog for shadow logic
∼3h manual effort for shadow logic
Our in-house minimal out-of-order processor
ISA: 4 customized insts (loadimm, ALU, load, branch)
Configuration: 4-stage pipeline, 4-entry ROB
Simple
commit bandwidth is 1 inst/cycle
OoO
Code size: 1,000 lines of Verilog
∼100 lines of Verilog for shadow logic
∼5h manual effort for shadow logic
Open-source out-of-order processor
ISA: 35 instructions in RV32IM
Ride Configuration: 6-stage pipeline, 8-entry ROB
core
commit bandwidth is 2 inst/cycle
[31]
Code size: 8,100 lines of Verilog
∼400 lines of Verilog for shadow logic
∼10h manual effort for shadow logic
Open-source out-of-order processor
ISA: RV64GC
Configuration: SmallBoomConfig
BOOM
32-entry ROB
[76]
commit bandwidth is 1 inst/cycle
Code size: 19k lines of Chisel (136k lines of Verilog)
∼240 lines of Verilog for shadow logic
∼8h manual effort for shadow logic

2) the out-of-order processor is assumed to be functionally
correct.
First, the definition of the correctness of our shadow logic
includes the shadow logic selecting the right signals to extract the ISA trace and the microarchitectural trace, and
the shadow logic generating the pause signal at the proper
time. As such, we ensure the derived ISA trace from the
out-of-order processor contains the writeback data of each
corresponding instruction.
Second, the functional correctness assumption ensures
that the commit stage generates the correct ISA instructions
and writeback data as the ISA specification. Together with
the shadow logic correctness assumption, we ensure the
derived ISA traces in our scheme are equivalent to the ISA
hypothesis in the contract property.
Decoupling of security and functional verification. Our
verification approach leverages the decoupling (i.e., separation) of functional verification and security verification.
Specifically, our approach for verifying a security property
generates a verification task that does not embody a proof
obligation related to the functional correctness of the outof-order processor. Instead, as stated above, we assume the
machine has been independently verified to be functionally
correct. Our choice is justified because verification engineers
spend significant effort on functional verification, and our
approach leverages this and avoids having to redo this effort
as a sub-task of security verification, which may explain
the significant verification performance improvement obtained with our approach. Similar decoupling approaches
are also used in inductive approaches on verifying contract
properties such as LEAVE [65].

6

Table 1. Detailed processor configurations.

2. Initialize the instruction memories in two out-of-order
processors to have symbolic values, so all possible programs will be explored in model checking.
3. Write assumptions (constraints) including: (1) the two
out-of-order processors have the same initial state except
that the secret in memory has different initial values; (2)
the contract constraint check must always hold.
4. Model check the DUV with the above assumptions and
the assertion that leakage assertion check holds.
We perform verification tasks using the commercial model
checking tool, JasperGold [10]. We use its Mp and AM solving
engines to find proofs, and use the Ht engine to detect leakage. The performance results were obtained on a server with
an Intel Xeon E5-4610 processor running at 2.4 GHz. We set
7 days as the time-out period for each verification task.

Experiment Setup

We implement shadow logic for verifying the sandboxing
contract and the constant-time contract (Section 2.2) on four
processors as shown in Table 1. Other than the three opensource processors, SimpleOoO is a toy out-of-order processor
developed by us that has the basic out-of-order execution
behaviors, and we augment it with different defense mechanisms. In Table 1, we compare the code size for each processor that we verified and the code size and manual effort for
the shadow logic. Note that although BOOM is much larger
than Ridecore, its shadow logic is less complex because it
only commits one instruction every cycle while Ridecore is a
superscalar processor that can commits two instructions per
cycle. This shows that the complexity of our shadow logic
does not necessarily grow as the processor gets larger.
Here is the overview of our verification workflow:

7

Experiment Results

7.1 Comparison with Baseline and Existing Schemes
To better understand how our work compares to the existing
techniques, we conduct experiments to compare our scheme
with the baseline, LEAVE [65], and UPEC [20]. We also include the baseline scheme, which is directly derived from
Eq. (1). We compare the verification results on five processor designs, two secure ones (Sodor and SimpleOoO-S)

1. Implement the Contract Shadow Logic that extracts and
compares the information from two out-of-order processors. The design under verification (DUV) includes both
processors and the shadow logic.
8

We provide a detailed comparison below.

Sandboxing Contract
Sodor SimpleOoO-S SimpleOoO Ridecore BOOM
Baseline
LEAVE [65]
UPEC [20]
Our Scheme

Â

Â

q



.

.





q

7.1.2 Comparison to Baseline. When verifying a secure
design (the first two columns), the baseline scheme times
out, unable to generate an answer. In contrast, our scheme
can successfully find the proof within 151 minutes. In formal verification, a timeout indicates that the model checker
is hitting an exponential wall on the model being verified,
i.e., the exponential size of the reachable state space is beyond the reach of the solver. This result highlights that our
scheme shows much better scalability of RTL verification
for software-hardware contracts compared with the baseline
scheme.

q

(q )
q

q

Table 2. A summary of comparing the Baseline, LEAVE [65],
UPEC [20], and our scheme on verifying the sandboxing
contract on 5 processors. “q” indicates valid attacks are found
(“(q)” indicates UPEC cannot find all possible attacks on
BOOM), “” indicates a proof is found, “Â” indicates a time
out on the verification task after running for 7 days, “.”
indicates false counterexamples are found, and a shaded
entry indicates the experiment is not conducted.

7.1.3 Comparison with LEAVE. LEAVE uses an inductive approach to verify processors against software-hardware
contracts. Their key contribution is to automatically derive
inductive invariants to assist deriving an inductive proof.
These invariants are supposed to capture the reachable states
of the state machines being verified. They start with a set
of automatically generated or manually written candidate
invariants and use a search algorithm to iteratively remove
invariants that do not hold. The expectation is that the final
remaining invariants are strong enough to prove security.
Otherwise, when insufficient invariants are used, the induction procedure will consider unreachable states and generate
false counterexamples. As such, they declare the verification
result as UNKNOWN. An UNKNOWN result indicates that
either the processor may be secure, but the search algorithm
cannot find a good set of invariants to make the proof go
through, or the processor may be insecure. As a side note,
LEAVE proposes invariants that consider the instruction inclusion and synchronization requirements (Section 5.2) in a
limited way for in-order processors. Our scheme is the first to
satisfy these two requirements in a general way, supporting
out-of-order and superscalar processors.
LEAVE has only been used to verify in-order processors.
As LEAVE is open-sourced [64], we extend the evaluation of
LEAVE to out-of-order processors. We use the automatically
generated candidate invariants described in LEAVE’s paper,
i.e., values in corresponding registers are equivalent in the
two copies of out-of-order processors.
When verifying an insecure version of SimpleOoO, our
scheme finds an attack in 2 seconds. However, we observe
LEAVE fails to find a set of invariants to prove security and
states that the result is UNKNOWN, i.e., LEAVE cannot
tell whether the design is secure or not. When verifying
SimpleOOO-S (the secure version), our scheme is able to
complete the proof within 2.5 hours, while LEAVE reports
UNKNOWN after searching invariants for 2.1 hours. During
its execution, we observe that LEAVE’s invariant-search algorithm continuously removes invariants from the candidate
sets until there are none left. The reason is that the automatically generated candidate invariants are insufficient to cover
reachable states for even simple out-of-order processors. In

and three insecure ones (SimpleOoO, Ridecore, and BOOM),
regarding two contracts, the sandboxing contract and the
constant-time programing contract. The secure out-of-order
core, noted as SimpleOoO-S, delays the issue time of a memory instruction until its commit time if at the time when it
enters the pipeline, there is a branch before it in the ROB.
7.1.1 Comparison Summary. The comparison results
regarding the sandboxing contract are summarized in Table 2. We observe similar results regarding the constant-time
contract except UPEC, which does not support it. Across all
five processors, our scheme can successfully find attacks or
proofs within a reasonable amount of time (concrete numbers reported later).
• Compared to the baseline, our scheme has a clear advantage in conducting unbounded proofs, where the baseline
easily times out on finding proofs on secure designs. We
observe similar performance in finding attacks between
the baseline and our scheme.
• Similar to our scheme, LEAVE can find proof on in-order
processors (Sodor). More importantly, our scheme performs better than LEAVE on out-of-order processors.
While LEAVE struggles with SimpleOOO designs, generating false counterexamples for both secure and insecure
designs, our approach can find bugs and prove security of
these designs.
• Since UPEC is a highly customized verification scheme and
requires advanced formal-method expertise to be adapted
to a different design, we only show evaluation results from
their paper. Even though it can successfully find attacks
on BOOM, the approach falls short in finding all possible
attacks, since it can only find attacks whose speculation
source is explicitly specified by the user.
• Our scheme still cannot scale to fully proving the security
of large out-of-order processors such as patched Ridecore
and BOOM, nor do other schemes (UPEC can do a partial
security proof for BOOM due to their customization).
9

these cases, LEAVE will require additional effort to improve
the invariant generation algorithm or ask the user to manually write invariants, both posing open research challenges.

Sandboxing
NoFwdfuturistic
NoFwdspectre
Delayfuturistic
Delayspectre
DoMspectre

7.1.4 Comparison with UPEC. UPEC uses an inductive
verification approach, assisted with substantial manual invariants by formal-method experts, to verify complex out-oforder processors including BOOM. As discussed in Section 1,
UPEC’s unbounded proof of secure designs is closely coupled with the defense scheme to be verified. Specifically,
they verified a defense scheme that prevents speculative load
instructions to execute before all preceding branch instructions in the ROB are resolved. With such a defense, under the
sandboxing contract, the secret data never propagates to any
other gates in the design. Their induction procedure finds
that this invariant holds for arbitrary initial states and they
can complete an unbounded proof by proving an induction
step that only involves 1 cycle of symbolic execution. However, this invariant does not hold for most defenses proposed
in the computer architecture community where speculative
states do spread in a complex manner inside the processor,
as with DoM [49], STT [73], and others.
In addition, we find their approach achieves high scalability at the cost of losing generality and completeness.
Specifically, UPEC’s verification procedure requires the user
to provide information on the source of speculation in the
processor. Their open-source prototype uses branch misprediction as the sole source of speculation, and their manual
invariants were developed based on this assumption.
To compare our scheme with UPEC, we implemented our
Contract Shadow Logic on BOOM for both sandboxing and
constant-time contracts (UPEC only handles the sandboxing
contract). We use the SmallBOOM configuration and directly
use the data cache and instruction cache as the memory with
the virtual memory module turned off. Both cache sizes are
configured to 256 bytes.
Our experiment results show that our scheme can find multiple attacks on BOOM exploiting different speculation sources.
First, we find an attack for the sandboxing contract in 120
minutes and a similar attack for the constant-time contract
in 36.6 minutes. In these two attacks, mis-speculation is triggered by exceptions due to memory address misalignment:

Constant-Time

66min
45h
21min
151min
6.5min2

0.4s
0.1s
10min
37min
5.9min

Table 3. Verification time using our scheme on SimpleOoO
augmented with different defenses. The red entry indicates
an attack is found and the green entry indicates a proof is
found.

Second, we can continue to search for other attacks following the standard practice in formal verification. We add
an assumption to exclude the first attack that we found.
The added assumption ensures the input program does not
involve memory accesses using misaligned addresses. Running the verification procedure for the sandboxing contract
leads us to the discovery of a new attack exploiting exceptions due to illegal memory accesses. The verification for
the constant-time contract generates an attack exploiting
branch misprediction. The former case takes 8.7 hours, and
the latter case takes 1.4 hours.
Finally, we further continue the experiments to exclude
the two attacks. The verification tasks time out after 24 hours.
The above experiments show that our scheme can scale to
find attacks on complex out-of-order cores, such as BOOM. In
addition, our scheme finds unknown attacks on processors
without specifying the source of speculation and ends up
finding multiple attacks that UPEC was unable to find.
7.2

Impact of Defense Mechanisms

We now study how various factors can affect the verification
time of our scheme. We start with the influence of defense
mechanisms on verification time. We extend the SimpleOoO
core with five microarchitecture defenses from the literature [49, 67, 73]. Note that we can directly reuse the shadow
logic we developed for SimpleOoO, highlighting the reusability of our approach. We note this is the first time for many
of these defense proposals to be evaluated as RTL designs,
in contrast to high-level abstract models [26, 56, 72] or via
gem5 simulation [9].
Defenses The following two mechanisms share similarities
with the defenses described in STT [73] and NDA [67].

1 lui

r6 , 65536 // set addr to a legal range
r14 , 1221( r6 ) // mis - alignment in addr
3 lh r0 , r14
// use secret as load addr
2 lhu

In the above code snippet, the second instruction loads the
secret into r14 and the third instruction uses the secret as
memory address, thus violating the leakage assertion check.
Since the second instruction triggers an exception due to
address misalignment, the second and third instructions will
not be committed, and thus will satisfy the contract constraint check. Note that, these attacks were not reported by
UPEC on BOOM as they only consider branch misprediction
as the speculation source.

• NoFwdfuturistic : Do not forward the data of a load instruction to younger instructions until its commit time.
• NoFwdspectre : Do not forward the data of a load instruction
to younger instructions until its commit time, if when the
load enters the pipeline, there is a branch before the load
in the ROB.
2 These two attacks are found using an 8-entry ROB instead of the default
4-entry ROB because these attacks require more concurrent instructions.

10

Regfile Size

The difference between the two mechanisms is that
NoFwdfuturistic considers all possible sources of speculation,
while NoFwdspectre only considers branch prediction as the
source of speculation.
The next three defenses work by delaying load instructions at different points in their lifetime.

Proving Time (min)

1000
100
10
1

• Delayfuturistic : Delay the issue time of a memory instruction until its commit time.
• Delayspectre : Delay the issue time of a memory instruction
until its commit time, if at the time when it enters the
pipeline, there is a branch before it in the ROB. It is noted
as SimpleOoO-S in Section 7.1.
• DoMspectre : This models a simplified version of the Delayon-Miss defense [49]. It always speculatively issues a load
instruction. If the load hits the L1 cache, return the data to
the core and proceed. If the load misses the L1 cache, delay
the load from being sent to the main memory if at the time
when the load enters the pipeline, there is a branch before
the load in the ROB. We model a cache with a single cache
entry with a 1-cycle hit and a 3-cycle miss.

4
8
16
Number of Entries

(a) Prove NoFwdfuturistic for
Sandbox Contract

2

ROB Size

4
8
16
Number of Entries

(b) Prove Delayspectre for

Constant-time Contract

Figure 2. Verification time when varying the size of the
register file, data memory, and re-order buffer.

When we increase the ROB size, the verification time increases exponentially. The ROB size determines the number
of inflight instructions, and the space of possible interactions
between instructions grows quickly with ROB size, taking a
much longer time to check.

Delayfuturistic and Delayspectre are secure on SimpleOoO
for both the sandboxing contract and constant-time contract, while DoMspectre is not secure. The vulnerability of
DoMspectre has been discovered in prior work [6, 21].
Evaluation Results Table 3 compares the checking time
of verifying the five defenses. For all the cases where we are
supposed to find a proof, i.e., when the designs are secure,
our scheme can find a proof for all of them within 45 hours,
with most completing in about an hour. We note in all the
cases, the baseline scheme times out (not shown in the table).
Comparing the checking time for different defenses, we
observe that defenses have a non-trivial impact on checking
time. First, it takes much longer to find the proof in secure
designs (above 10 minutes) than to find an attack in insecure
designs (below 10 minutes). Second, it takes less time to find
a proof on a relatively more conservative defense mechanism.
Comparing the pair of NoFwd and the pair of Delay defenses,
the futuristic version takes much less time to verify.
7.3

2

Data Mem Size
1000
100
10
1

8

Limitations and Future Work

Despite being able to achieve significant verification performance improvement compared to the baseline and several
related works, we acknowledge this paper has several limitations. First, one appealing feature of our verification scheme
is that the proposed contract shadow logic is conceptually
reusable across different designs, given that the primary task
of the shadow logic is to simply extract committed instruction information. We must concede that, thus far, constructing and synchronizing the shadow logic for the designs in
our evaluation has relied on manual effort. To further reduce
the required manual effort, we want to investigate how to
partially automate this process. Our problem shares similarity to tandem verification [70] for functional correctness,
where the same ISA-level information is extracted from RTL
implementations. Applying techniques similar to [70] might
help in automating part of the effort.
Second, our scheme does not fully address the scalability
issue for verifying out-of-order processors with a realistic
ROB size, which is usually above 100. This scalability issue is
a well-known problem in hardware verification. On the positive side, we believe a reasonably reduced-size out-of-order
machine already exhibits the essential security-relevant features of a real-size out-of-order machine, including speculation, resource contention, and instruction reordering. However, we believe work can be done to further improve the
scalability. One promising direction is to explore taint propagation techniques like GLIFT [52, 54]. As studied in prior
work [28], taint propagation requires making a delicate tradeoff between precision and verification overhead. The taint
propagation logic can be customized to the security property and specific hardware design to accomplish this. We

Impact of Structure Sizes

Finally, we study how structure sizes of re-order buffer, register file, and memory affect verification time. Fig. 2 shows
the checking time for verifying NoFwdfuturistic defense for
the sandboxing contract and Delayspectre defense for the
constant-time contract. The default configuration consistently uses 4 entries for the register file, ROB, and data memory. The three lines in the plot are derived by changing one
of the three structures and keeping the other two unchanged.
Overall, the size of the register file has negligible impact
on verification time. The size of data memory has a limited
impact on proving the sandboxing contract but has a larger
impact on proving the constant-time contract. Note that the
size of ROB has a significant impact (y-axis is log scale).
11

Security Properties There exist RTL security verification
works that target security properties not related to speculative execution. These works target various data-oblivious
properties. For example, Clepsydra [4] verifies hardware
modules, such as ALUs and Caches, take the same amount
of time when executing on different input data. IODINE [23],
Xenon [57], UPEC-DIT [19] check whether each instruction’s execution time is independent of its operands for
in-order/out-of-order processors. Knox [5] builds a framework to verify that when a specific program is running on
a physically-isolated Hardware Security Module (HSM), its
execution time does not leak extra information beyond the
functional specification of the program.
Checking Techniques In addition to leveraging formalmethod techniques, fuzzing-based schemes [22, 30, 43, 46,
47, 66, 69], such as SpecDoctor [30], check RTL or blackbox
hardware for speculative execution vulnerabilities by generating and testing random attack patterns. Although the
above works cannot guarantee full coverage of speculative
execution attacks, they can be faster at detecting security
bugs when evaluating large designs.
Verification of Clean-slate Designs Finally, an exciting
yet orthogonal line of work focuses on security verification of clean-slate designs. SecVerilog [75] enables hardware
programmers to enforce security policies while developing
the hardware. A violation of the security policy would be
detected at compile time. SpecVerilog [74] further extends
this ability to support specifying speculation-related policies.
[53] formally verifies that a low-trust architecture with a
specialized ISA and hardware is free of timing side-channel
leakage.

hypothesize that taint propagation techniques could be combined with our scheme to further improve verification performance.
Finally, as we explore the relationship between manually crafted invariants and and the information embedded
within our shadow logic, some additional insights emerge.
We speculate that our shadow logic may offer a rich array of
invariants to the model checker. This hypothesis is rooted in
the notion that contract constraints, originally designed to
constrain software programs, indirectly strongly constrain
the set of reachable states of the processor. However, more investigation is needed to understand the constraining power
of the shadow logic and how this influences the performance
of the verification procedure.

9

Related Work

Among all related works, UPEC [20] and LEAVE [65] are
the closest to us, as they both target speculative execution
vulnerabilities and work on RTL. We have provided detailed
comparisons of our scheme, UPEC, and LEAVE in Section 7.1.
We now discuss other related work. We identify that previous
approaches differ along three axes: 1) verification target, 2)
security properties, and 3) checking techniques.
Targets for Verification of Secure Speculation There
is a lot of work leveraging formal methods to verify secure
speculation properties (variants of software-hardware contracts), but their targets differ from our work, either focusing
on abstract processor models or software.
Pensieve [72], Guarnieri et al. [26], and CheckMate [56]
target abstract processor models (not RTL). Specifically, Pensieve [72] does bounded model checking to detect speculative execution vulnerabilities on modular models connected
using hand-shaking interfaces. Guarnieri et al. [26] uses a paper proof to reason about an abstract out-of-order processor
model expressed as operational semantics. CheckMate [56]
applies security litmus tests on abstract processor models expressed as 𝜇hb graphs to synthesize exploit patterns, so as to
find new attacks through these patterns. Although verifying
abstract processor models can give designers key insights,
this approach unavoidably neglects RTL implementation
details, which may cause speculative execution attacks.
On the software side, there are efforts to guarantee that a
program does not contain gadgets that can be exploited by
different speculative execution attacks [13, 16, 44, 45, 62, 68].
For example, Serberus [45] detects code patterns, at compile
time, in cryptographic primitives that can be exploited by
broad ranges of speculative execution attacks. This line of
work usually assumes a specific hardware model, and then
verifies that specific pieces of software satisfy the software
constraint component in software-hardware contracts. The
goal is very different from our work, where we verify the
hardware’s RTL implementation.

10

Conclusions

Our paper presents Contract Shadow Logic, a broadlyapplicable approach for performing formal verification of
security properties on RTL designs for software-hardware
contracts. Our scheme asks processor designers to construct
shadow logic to extract ISA observation traces from processors and enforce the instruction inclusion and synchronization requirements. Our evaluation shows the strength of our
scheme compared with the baseline and two state-of-the-art
RTL verification schemes in both finding attacks on insecure
designs and deriving unbounded proofs for secure designs.

References
[1] Sam Ainsworth. Ghostminion: A strictness-ordered cache system for
spectre mitigation. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture, pages 592–606, 2021.
[2] Sam Ainsworth and Timothy M. Jones. Muontrap: Preventing crossdomain spectre-like attacks by capturing speculative state. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 2020.
[3] AMD. Software techniques for managing speculation on amd processors. https://www.amd.com/system/files/documents/software12

[19] Lucas Deutschmann, Johannes Mueller, Mohammad Rahmani Fadiheh, Dominik Stoffel, and Wolfgang Kunz. A scalable formal verification methodology for data-oblivious hardware. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.07757, 2023.
[20] Mohammad Rahmani Fadiheh, Johannes Müller, Raik Brinkmann,
Subhasish Mitra, Dominik Stoffel, and Wolfgang Kunz. A formal
approach for detecting vulnerabilities to transient execution attacks
in out-of-order processors. In 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.
[21] Jacob Fustos, Michael Bechtel, and Heechul Yun. Spectrerewind: Leaking secrets to past instructions. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop
on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security. ACM, 2020.
[22] Moein Ghaniyoun, Kristin Barber, Yinqian Zhang, and Radu Teodorescu. Introspectre: A pre-silicon framework for discovery and analysis
of transient execution vulnerabilities. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages
874–887. IEEE, 2021.
[23] Klaus v Gleissenthall, Rami Gökhan Kıcı, Deian Stefan, and Ranjit
Jhala. IODINE: Verifying Constant-Time execution of hardware. In
28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pages 1411–
1428, 2019.
[24] Aman Goel and Karem Sakallah. AVR: abstractly verifying reachability. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems: 26th International Conference, TACAS 2020, Held as Part of the
European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS
2020, Dublin, Ireland, April 25–30, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 26, pages
413–422. Springer, 2020.
[25] Ben Gras, Kaveh Razavi, Herbert Bos, and Cristiano Giuffrida. Translation leak-aside buffer: Defeating cache side-channel protections with
TLB attacks. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
18), pages 955–972, 2018.
[26] Marco Guarnieri, Boris Köpf, Jan Reineke, and Pepe Vila. Hardwaresoftware contracts for secure speculation. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1868–1883. IEEE, 2021.
[27] Jann Horn. Speculative execution, variant 4: Speculative store bypass.
https://bugs.chromium.org/p/project-zero/issues/detail?id=1528, 2018.
[Accessed 23-06-2024].
[28] Wei Hu, Jason Oberg, Ali Irturk, Mohit Tiwari, Timothy Sherwood,
Dejun Mu, and Ryan Kastner. Theoretical fundamentals of gate level
information flow tracking. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 30(8):1128–1140, 2011.
[29] Bo-Yuan Huang, Hongce Zhang, Pramod Subramanyan, Yakir Vizel,
Aarti Gupta, and Sharad Malik. Instruction-level abstraction (ILA):
A uniform specification for system-on-chip (SoC) verification. ACM
Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems (TODAES),
24(1):1–24, 2018.
[30] Jaewon Hur, Suhwan Song, Sunwoo Kim, and Byoungyoung Lee. Specdoctor: Differential fuzz testing to find transient execution vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 1473–1487, 2022.
[31] Arch Lab. in Tokyo Institute of Technology. RIsc-v Dynamic Execution
CORE. https://github.com/ridecore/ridecore, 2016. [Accessed 23-062024].
[32] Intel. Intel Side Channel Vulnerability L1TF. https://www.intel.com/
content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/l1tf.html, 2018.
[Accessed 23-06-2024].
Intel Analysis of Speculative Execution Side Chan[33] Intel.
nels.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/
articles/technical/software-security-guidance/technicaldocumentation/analysis-speculative-execution-side-channels.html,
2021. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
[34] Khaled N Khasawneh, Esmaeil Mohammadian Koruyeh, Chengyu
Song, Dmitry Evtyushkin, Dmitry Ponomarev, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh.

techniques-for-managing-speculation.pdf, 2023. [Accessed 23-062024].
[4] Armaiti Ardeshiricham, Wei Hu, and Ryan Kastner. Clepsydra: Modeling timing flows in hardware designs. In 2017 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), pages 147–154. IEEE,
2017.
[5] Anish Athalye, M Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Verifying
hardware security modules with {Information-Preserving} refinement. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 22), pages 503–519, 2022.
[6] Mohammad Behnia, Prateek Sahu, Riccardo Paccagnella, Jiyong Yu,
Zirui Neil Zhao, Xiang Zou, Thomas Unterluggauer, Josep Torrellas,
Carlos Rozas, Adam Morrison, et al. Speculative interference attacks:
Breaking invisible speculation schemes. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, pages 1046–1060, 2021.
[7] Sergey Berezin, Edmund Clarke, Armin Biere, and Yunshan Zhu. Verification of out-of-order processor designs using model checking and
a light-weight completion function. Formal Methods in System Design,
20:159–186, 2002.
[8] Atri Bhattacharyya, Alexandra Sandulescu, Matthias Neugschwandtner, Alessandro Sorniotti, Babak Falsafi, Mathias Payer, and Anil Kurmus. Smotherspectre: exploiting speculative execution through port
contention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, pages 785–800, 2019.
[9] Nathan Binkert, Bradford Beckmann, Gabriel Black, Steven K Reinhardt, Ali Saidi, Arkaprava Basu, Joel Hestness, Derek R Hower, Tushar
Krishna, Somayeh Sardashti, Rathijit Sen, Korey Sewell, Muhammad
Shoaib, Nilay Vaish, Mark D. Hill, and David A. Wood. The Gem5
Simulator. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 2011.
[10] Cadence. Jasper Formal Property Verification App — cadence.com.
https://www.cadence.com/en_US/home/tools/system-design-andverification/formal-and-static-verification/jasper-gold-verificationplatform/formal-property-verification-app.html.
[Accessed
23-06-2024].
[11] Claudio Canella, Daniel Genkin, Lukas Giner, Daniel Gruss, Moritz
Lipp, Marina Minkin, Daniel Moghimi, Frank Piessens, Michael
Schwarz, Berk Sunar, et al. Fallout: Leaking data on meltdownresistant cpus. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2019.
[12] Chandler Carruth. Speculative Load Hardening. https://llvm.org/docs/
SpeculativeLoadHardening.html, 2018. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
[13] Sunjay Cauligi, Craig Disselkoen, Klaus v Gleissenthall, Dean Tullsen,
Deian Stefan, Tamara Rezk, and Gilles Barthe. Constant-time foundations for the new spectre era. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
pages 913–926, 2020.
[14] Sunjay Cauligi, Craig Disselkoen, Daniel Moghimi, Gilles Barthe, and
Deian Stefan. SoK: Practical foundations for software spectre defenses.
In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 666–680.
IEEE, 2022.
[15] Christopher Celio. RISCV-Sodor. https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscvsodor, 2013. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
[16] Kevin Cheang, Cameron Rasmussen, Sanjit Seshia, and Pramod Subramanyan. A formal approach to secure speculation. In 2019 IEEE 32nd
Computer Security Foundations Symposium (CSF), pages 288–28815.
IEEE, 2019.
[17] Md Hafizul Islam Chowdhuryy and Fan Yao. Leaking secrets through
modern branch predictors in the speculative world. IEEE Transactions
on Computers, 71(9):2059–2072, 2021.
[18] Michael R Clarkson and Fred B Schneider. Hyperproperties. Journal
of Computer Security, 18(6):1157–1210, 2010.

13

[50] Philipp Schmitz, Johannes Mueller, Christian Bartsch, Dominik Stoffel,
and Wolfgang Kunz. Upec-pn: Exhaustive constant time verification
of low-level software using property checking. In MBMV 2023; 26th
Workshop, pages 1–8. VDE, 2023.
[51] Michael Schwarz, Moritz Lipp, Daniel Moghimi, Jo Van Bulck, Julian
Stecklina, Thomas Prescher, and Daniel Gruss. Zombieload: Crossprivilege-boundary data sampling. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages
753–768, 2019.
[52] Flavien Solt, Ben Gras, and Kaveh Razavi. CellIFT: Leveraging cells for
scalable and precise dynamic information flow tracking in RTL. In 31st
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), pages 2549–2566,
2022.
[53] Qinhan Tan, Yonathan Fisseha, Shibo Chen, Lauren Biernacki, JeanBaptiste Jeannin, Sharad Malik, and Todd Austin. Security verification
of low-trust architectures. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 945–959,
2023.
[54] Mohit Tiwari, Hassan MG Wassel, Bita Mazloom, Shashidhar Mysore,
Frederic T Chong, and Timothy Sherwood. Complete information
flow tracking from the gates up. In Proceedings of the 14th international
conference on Architectural support for programming languages and
operating systems, pages 109–120, 2009.
[55] Youssef Tobah, Andrew Kwong, Ingab Kang, Daniel Genkin, and
Kang G Shin. Spechammer: Combining spectre and rowhammer
for new speculative attacks. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2022.
[56] Caroline Trippel, Daniel Lustig, and Margaret Martonosi. Checkmate:
Automated synthesis of hardware exploits and security litmus tests.
In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 947–960. IEEE, 2018.
[57] Klaus v. Gleissenthall, Rami Gökhan Kıcı, Deian Stefan, and Ranjit
Jhala. Solver-aided constant-time hardware verification. In Proceedings
of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 429–444, 2021.
[58] Jo Van Bulck, Marina Minkin, Ofir Weisse, Daniel Genkin, Baris
Kasikci, Frank Piessens, Mark Silberstein, Thomas F Wenisch, Yuval Yarom, and Raoul Strackx. Foreshadow: Extracting the keys to the
intel SGX kingdom with transient Out-of-Order execution. In 27th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18), pages 991–1008,
2018.
[59] Jo Van Bulck, Daniel Moghimi, Michael Schwarz, Moritz Lippi, Marina
Minkin, Daniel Genkin, Yuval Yarom, Berk Sunar, Daniel Gruss, and
Frank Piessens. LVI: Hijacking transient execution through microarchitectural load value injection. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP), pages 54–72. IEEE, 2020.
[60] Stephan Van Schaik, Alyssa Milburn, Sebastian Österlund, Pietro Frigo,
Giorgi Maisuradze, Kaveh Razavi, Herbert Bos, and Cristiano Giuffrida.
RIDL: Rogue in-flight data load. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP), pages 88–105. IEEE, 2019.
[61] Jose Rodrigo Sanchez Vicarte, Pradyumna Shome, Nandeeka Nayak,
Caroline Trippel, Adam Morrison, David Kohlbrenner, and Christopher W Fletcher. Opening pandora’s box: A systematic study of new
ways microarchitecture can leak private data. In 2021 ACM/IEEE
48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
IEEE, 2021.
[62] Guanhua Wang, Sudipta Chattopadhyay, Ivan Gotovchits, Tulika Mitra, and Abhik Roychoudhury. oo7: Low-overhead defense against
spectre attacks via program analysis. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 47(11):2504–2519, 2019.
[63] Yingchen Wang, Riccardo Paccagnella, Elizabeth Tang He, Hovav
Shacham, Christopher W. Fletcher, and David Kohlbrenner. Hertzbleed:
Turning power Side-Channel attacks into remote timing attacks on
x86. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22). USENIX

Safespec: Banishing the spectre of a meltdown with leakage-free speculation. In 2019 56th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC),
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[35] Vladimir Kiriansky and Carl Waldspurger. Speculative buffer overflows: Attacks and defenses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03757, 2018.
[36] Paul Kocher, Jann Horn, Anders Fogh, , Daniel Genkin, Daniel Gruss,
Werner Haas, Mike Hamburg, Moritz Lipp, Stefan Mangard, Thomas
Prescher, Michael Schwarz, and Yuval Yarom. Spectre attacks: Exploiting speculative execution. In 40th IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P’19), 2019.
[37] Esmaeil Mohammadian Koruyeh, Khaled N Khasawneh, Chengyu
Song, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. Spectre returns! speculation attacks
using the return stack buffer. In 12th USENIX Workshop on Offensive
Technologies (WOOT 18), 2018.
[38] K Rustan M Leino. Dafny: An automatic program verifier for functional correctness. In International conference on logic for programming
artificial intelligence and reasoning, pages 348–370. Springer, 2010.
[39] Moritz Lipp, Michael Schwarz, Daniel Gruss, Thomas Prescher, Werner
Haas, Anders Fogh, Jann Horn, Stefan Mangard, Paul Kocher, Daniel
Genkin, Yuval Yarom, and Mike Hamburg. Meltdown: Reading kernel
memory from user space. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 18), 2018.
[40] Kevin Loughlin, Ian Neal, Jiacheng Ma, Elisa Tsai, Ofir Weisse, Satish
Narayanasamy, and Baris Kasikci. DOLMA: Securing speculation with
the principle of transient Non-Observability. In 30th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pages 1397–1414, 2021.
[41] Giorgi Maisuradze and Christian Rossow. ret2spec: Speculative execution using return stack buffers. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2018.
[42] Stefan Mangard, Elisabeth Oswald, and Thomas Popp. Power Analysis
Attacks: Revealing the Secrets of Smart Cards (Advances in Information
Security). Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[43] Daniel Moghimi, Moritz Lipp, Berk Sunar, and Michael Schwarz.
Medusa: Microarchitectural data leakage via automated attack synthesis. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), pages
1427–1444, 2020.
[44] Nicholas Mosier, Hanna Lachnitt, Hamed Nemati, and Caroline Trippel.
Axiomatic hardware-software contracts for security. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
pages 72–86, 2022.
[45] Nicholas Mosier, Hamed Nemati, John C Mitchell, and Caroline Trippel.
Serberus: Protecting cryptographic code from spectres at compile-time.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05174, 2023.
[46] Oleksii Oleksenko, Christof Fetzer, Boris Köpf, and Mark Silberstein.
Revizor: Testing black-box cpus against speculation contracts. In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pages
226–239, 2022.
[47] Oleksii Oleksenko, Marco Guarnieri, Boris Köpf, and Mark Silberstein.
Hide and seek with spectres: Efficient discovery of speculative information leaks with random testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07642,
2023.
[48] Alastair Reid, Rick Chen, Anastasios Deligiannis, David Gilday, David
Hoyes, Will Keen, Ashan Pathirane, Owen Shepherd, Peter Vrabel, and
Ali Zaidi. End-to-end verification of processors with isa-formal. In
Computer Aided Verification: 28th International Conference, CAV 2016,
Toronto, ON, Canada, July 17-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 28, pages
42–58. Springer, 2016.
[49] Christos Sakalis, Stefanos Kaxiras, Alberto Ros, Alexandra Jimborean,
and Magnus Själander. Efficient invisible speculative execution
through selective delay and value prediction. In Proceedings of the 46th
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages 723–735,
2019.
14

Association, 2022.
[64] Zilong Wang, Gideon Mohr, Klaus von Gleissenthall, Jan Reineke,
and Marco Guarnieri. Open-sourced framework of "specification and
verification of side-channel security for open-source processors via
leakage contracts". https://github.com/zilongwang123/LeaVe, 2023.
Accessed 15 January 2024.
[65] Zilong Wang, Gideon Mohr, Klaus von Gleissenthall, Jan Reineke, and
Marco Guarnieri. Specification and verification of side-channel security for open-source processors via leakage contracts. In Proceedings
of the 30th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
CCS 2023. ACM, 2023.
[66] Daniel Weber, Ahmad Ibrahim, Hamed Nemati, Michael Schwarz, and
Christian Rossow. Osiris: Automated discovery of microarchitectural
side channels. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
21), pages 1415–1432, 2021.
[67] Ofir Weisse, Ian Neal, Kevin Loughlin, Thomas F Wenisch, and Baris
Kasikci. NDA: Preventing speculative execution attacks at their source.
In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture, pages 572–586, 2019.
[68] Meng Wu and Chao Wang. Abstract interpretation under speculative
execution. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 802–815,
2019.
[69] Yuan Xiao, Yinqian Zhang, and Radu Teodorescu. Speechminer: A
framework for investigating and measuring speculative execution
vulnerabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00329, 2019.

[70] Yue Xing, Aarti Gupta, and Sharad Malik. Generalizing tandem simulation: Connecting high-level and rtl simulation models. In 2022 27th
Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2022.
[71] Mengjia Yan, Jiho Choi, Dimitrios Skarlatos, Adam Morrison, Christopher Fletcher, and Josep Torrellas. Invisispec: Making speculative execution invisible in the cache hierarchy. In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 428–441.
IEEE, 2018.
[72] Yuheng Yang, Thomas Bourgeat, Stella Lau, and Mengjia Yan. Pensieve:
Microarchitectural modeling for security evaluation. In Proceedings of
the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
pages 1–15, 2023.
[73] Jiyong Yu, Mengjia Yan, Artem Khyzha, Adam Morrison, Josep Torrellas, and Christopher W. Fletcher. Speculative Taint Tracking (STT):
A Comprehensive Protection for Speculatively Accessed Data. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture. ACM, 2019.
[74] Drew Zagieboylo, Charles Sherk, Andrew C Myers, and G Edward Suh.
Specverilog: Adapting information flow control for secure speculation.
In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 2068–2082, 2023.
[75] Danfeng Zhang, Yao Wang, G Edward Suh, and Andrew C Myers.
A hardware design language for timing-sensitive information-flow
security. Acm Sigplan Notices, 50(4):503–516, 2015.
[76] Jerry Zhao, Ben Korpan, Abraham Gonzalez, and Krste Asanovic.
Sonicboom: The 3rd generation berkeley out-of-order machine. May
2020.

15

