Robustness Verification for Checking Crash
Consistency of Non-volatile Memory
Zhilei Han

Fei He

School of Software
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
hzl21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

School of Software
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
hefei@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies provide competitive performance with DRAM and ensure data
persistence in the event of system failure. However, it exhibits weak behaviour in terms of the order in which stores
are committed to NVMs, and therefore requires extra efforts
from developers to flush pending writes. To ensure correctness of this error-prone task, it is crucial to develop a rigid
method to check crash consistency of programs running
on NVM devices. Most existing solutions are testing-based
and rely on user guidance to dynamically detect such deficiencies. In this paper, we present a fully automated method
to verify robustness, a newly established property for ensuring crash consistency of such programs. The method is
based on the observation that, reachability of a post-crash
non-volatile state under a given pre-crash execution can
be reduced to validity of the pre-crash execution with additional ordering constraints. Our robustness verification
algorithm employs a search-based framework to explore all
partial executions and states, and checks if any non-volatile
state is reachable under certain pre-crash execution. Once
a reachable non-volatile state is obtained, we further check
its reachability under memory consistency model. The algorithm is implemented in a prototype tool PMVerify that
leverages symbolic encoding of the program and utilizes an
SMT solver to efficiently explore all executions and states.
The method is integrated into the DPLL(T) framework to
optimize the robustness checking algorithm. Experiments
on the PMDK example benchmark show that PMVerify is
competitive with the state-of-the-art dynamic tool, PSan, in
terms of robustness violation detection.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Verification;
• Hardware → Memory and dense storage; • Computer
systems organization → Reliability.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 International License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707269

Keywords: persistent memory, non-volatile memory, robustness, program verification, crash consistency
ACM Reference Format:
Zhilei Han and Fei He. 2025. Robustness Verification for Checking
Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory. In Proceedings of the
30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25),
March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707269

1

Introduction

Non-volatile memory (a.k.a. NVM, or persistent memory) is
a kind of non-conventional, byte-addressable storage device
that preserves its content after a power failure [35, 36]. It
enables direct access to persistent data using standard load
and store instructions, and thus avoids the overhead of OS
system calls. Due to its competitive performance with DRAM
and guarantee of data persistence, it has been widely used
in persistency-critical systems such as databases [4, 48, 51]
and file systems [8, 13, 33, 43, 60–63, 67].
However, modern processors have write-back caches that
induce non-determinism in the order stores are written to
memory. Since cache systems are volatile, it may lead to data
loss if some stores have not been committed to NVM when
a crash happens. The exact order in which stores are written back to NVM, referred to as persist order, is constrained
by the cache coherence protocol. Similar to memory consistency models which specify visibility order of memory
operations, in recent works the Intel-x86 [10, 37, 53–55] and
ARMv8 [10, 56] persistency models have been formalized
which prescribes the persist order. Both architectures exhibit
weak behaviours in terms of persist order.
As a simple example on Intel-x86, assume crash happens
after executing the two instructions a = 1; b = 1. Upon
recovery, it is possible to observe the non-volatile state a =
0; b = 1 (we assume 0 is the initial value of a). In general,
persist order might differ from the order memory operations
are made visible. Figure 1 shows a possible execution of these
two instructions and relevant orders. Here the store a = 1
is issued and becomes visible first per program order, but
remains in caches. On the contrary, the store b = 1 is issued
later but leaves the cache before the system fails. The store
a = 1 in the volatile cache is thus lost due to the crash.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
persist order

visibility order

𝑆𝑎

store a

𝑆𝑏

store b

𝑃𝑏

𝑃𝑎

Figure 1. A possible visibility and persist order of two stores
a = 1; b = 1; in a single thread. 𝑆𝑎 , 𝑆𝑏 are the points the
stores are made visible to all threads, and 𝑃𝑎 , 𝑃𝑏 are when
they are committed to NVM. signifies system failure.

Overall, persistent programming is an error-prone task.
It is the responsibility of the developers to avoid corruption of data residing on NVMs, since any inconsistency
would persist across reboots. This necessitates a clear understanding of the persistency semantics. Although instructions
(e.g. clflush and clflushopt on Intel-x86) have been introduced to constrain persist order of memory operations, the
fact that stores are committed to NVMs in an out-of-order
manner can be counter-intuitive. The matter becomes even
more intricate for a multi-threaded program.
To assist developers in correctly programming NVMs,
researchers primarily pursue two approaches. On the one
hand, high-level mechanisms such as transactions [6, 11, 18–
20, 27, 56] and locks [5, 7, 26, 29, 45] have been developed to
facilitate the development of NVM programs. However, these
mechanisms often introduce significant overhead. On the
other hand, a line of research focuses on enhancing the reliability of NVM programs [9, 12, 16, 23, 34, 44, 46, 47, 50, 57].
An important property, known as crash consistency, has
been proposed to characterize the reliability of NVM programs. It ensures that the program state recovered from NVM
after a system failure is always consistent, thereby enabling
seamless resumption of program execution [57]. However,
a considerable amount of existing tools require extra guidance provided by the users for accurate bug detection. For
instance, XFDetector [46] requires user annotation of commit variables to avoid false alarms, while PMTest [47] and
PMDebugger [12] requires explicit annotation of ordering
constraints in the program. [50] is able to prove correctness
of NVM programs in terms of persistency invariant, a predicate that always holds on recovered state, but such invariant
is hard to obtain. The model checker Yat [44] requires no
user intervention, but its eager method does not perform
well [23].
To circumvent the aforementioned difficulties in crash
consistency checking, Gorjiara et al. [22] proposed a novel

Zhilei Han and Fei He

correctness criterion called robustness. Intuitively, a program
is robust if the state recovered from NVM after system failure
is guaranteed to be reachable under memory consistency
model 1 . For example, consider the program in Figure 1 and
the observed post-crash state a = 0; b = 1. This state is
not reachable if we ignore the existence of NVM devices and
possible crashes, i.e. we only consider its normal executions.
Therefore, the program is non-robust.
An advantage of robustness is that user annotation is no
longer necessary for verification. In this setting, crash consistency checking can be separated into two steps: (1) prove
the program is robust, and (2) verify program correctness
under memory consistency model. The latter problem is wellstudied and numerous methods for checking weak memory
consistency exist in the literature [3, 15, 24, 28, 39, 59, 64],
which could be reused on a robust program.
Since robustness acts as a bridge that reduces crash consistency to memory consistency, in this paper, we focus on
developing a method for checking robustness of NVM programs. The tool PSan developed in [22], which is based on
Jaaru [23], employs a dynamic algorithm to sample execution traces from the program, and checks these traces for
robustness violation. While able to find robustness violation,
it is limited to test input generation and sampling. In contrast
with PSan, we propose a static method aimed at formally
establishing robustness.
Our method is based upon an observation that, the reachability of a post-crash non-volatile state under certain precrash execution can be reduced to validity of the execution
with some additional ordering constraints. This enables us
to efficiently identify reachable non-volatile states given a
pre-crash execution, and check if they are also reachable
under memory consistency model. The latter reachability
checks are further optimized by shrinking its search space
using the pre-crash execution.
Furthermore, we leverage a search method to explore
all possible executions and (non-volatile) states and check
their reachability. Apart from general-purpose search algorithms, some methods have been designed for efficient
exploration of the vast search space in concurrent programs.
These include stateless model checking algorithms with dynamic partial order reduction [1, 39–41] and SMT-based
methods that encode the program and rely on constraint
solving [3, 15, 17, 24, 59, 65, 66]. Our implementation opts
for the latter method for exploration, which depends on a
symbolic encoding of the input program, and a dedicated
theory solver for robustness checking. The solver utilizes
the emerging ordering consistency theory [24] for optimized
validity checking used in the dual reachability checks and
is incorporated into the DPLL(T) framework. Robustness
1 The definition of robustness in this paper is formulated differently from

the original definition in [22], where it is defined using the notion of strong
persistency model instead of reachability of recovered state.

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

violation is reported whenever we find a non-volatile state
that is unreachable under memory consistency model, and
we confirm robustness of the program if the exploration is
exhaustive.
The proposed method has been implemented in a prototype tool called PMVerify. On 26 programs collected from
the PMDK [27] pmemobj libraries, PMVerify is able to report
12 robustness violations and successfully proves robustness
of one case. Compared to the dynamic model checking tool
PSan [22], our method finds 6 more violations. Besides, on
a set of 12 manually crafted robust programs, PMVerify is
able to prove 6 of them.
In summary, our main contributions are:
1. We show that the reachability checking problem of a
post-crash non-volatile state under a given pre-crash
execution can be reduced to the well-studied validity checking problem of a concurrent execution (Section 3).
2. We propose a novel and efficient algorithm for checking robustness of all possible executions within a nonvolatile memory program (Section 4). This algorithm
is encapsulated as a dedicated theory solver and incorporated into the DPLL(T) framework (Section 5).
3. The approach is implemented in a prototype tool, and
we conduct experiments on PMDK benchmarks and a
set of manually crafted robust programs. Evaluation
results show our method is competitive with dynamic
tool PSan on robustness violation detection (Section 6).

2

Preliminaries

2.1

x86 Persistency Model

In this paper, we focus on checking robustness of non-volatile
memories on Intel-x86 platforms. The visibility order of memory operations is characterized by the standard x86-TSO
model [58], while persist order is prescribed by Px86, a persistency model formalized in [55]. In this setting, a system
typically employs a three-layer memory hierarchy per Px86
operational semantics: instructions are issued to thread-local
store buffers first, then propagated to a global persistent
buffer (write-back caches), from where stores are committed
to NVM.
Cache line write-back instructions can be used to constrain persist order. The Intel-x86 architecture provides three
such instructions: (1) cache line flush instruction clflush,
(2) cache line optimized flush instruction clflushopt, and
(3) cache line write back instruction clwb. All three of these
instructions write back the content of a single cache line, but
differ in how they could be reordered with other instructions.
clflush instruction has stronger constraints and can only
be reordered with loads, while clflushopt can be reordered
with store, clflush and clflushopt instructions to other
cache lines. clwb has the same semantics as clflushopt but

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

does not invalidate the cache line, providing better performance. To further constrain the order, the memory barriers
mfence and sfence can be used. mfence can not be reordered
while sfence allows reordering with loads.
Table 1 summarizes the order between relevant instructions based on the standard x86-TSO model and Px86 semantics. Note only visibility order is characterized in the table,
which roughly corresponds to the order in which instructions propagate from store buffers to the persistent buffer
on Px86.
We can now define the persist order and reachability of
non-volatile states:
Definition 1 (Persist Order). Given a fixed visibility order
(defined later in Definition 5 as hb), the persist order, written
nvo, is defined as a total order on all stores and flushes that
satisfies the following two axioms [55]:
1. The visibility order and persist order coincide between
stores to the same variable.
2. If a store is (visibility-)ordered before a flush to the
same variable, then it must persist before any stores
(visibility-)ordered after the flush.
At any point during program execution, only stores in
a prefix of the events in nvo have persisted. In the case of
system failure, these persisted stores in the prefix are safe
and recoverable, which induce a non-volatile state 𝑠 where for
each location 𝑥, 𝑠 (𝑥) equals the last store to 𝑥 in the prefix. If
a state 𝑠 is induced by a prefix of some persist order nvo that
contains all flushes, 𝑠 is said to be a reachable non-volatile
state.
Remark 1. An nvo-prefix is required to contain all flushes
since we consider a full execution. Note that while flushes
take effect asynchronously under Intel-x86, it has been proved
by Khyzha and Lahav [37] that regarding flushes as synchronous yields equivalent reachable states. Section 4 discusses
partial execution.
2.2

Program and Execution

2.2.1 Programs. We study a typical imperative program
that assumes a set of thread-local variables V𝑙 (written a,
b, c etc.) and shared variables V𝑝 (written x, y, z etc.). It
may utilize the flush and fence primitives, which exhibit
semantics of clflush and mfence respectively as in Table 12 .
To simplify presentation, all shared variables reside on nonvolatile memory, and flush operations work at the granularity
of variables instead of cache lines.
A thread consists of a sequence of instructions, and a
(concurrent) program is the parallel composition of one or
more threads. We use the symbol ∥ for parallel composition,
and for each thread, we designate a thread identifier 𝜏 ∈ Tid.
Likewise, each instruction in a thread is associated with
2We note that our implementation supports all variants of flush operations

and barriers (Section 6).

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Zhilei Han and Fei He

Table 1. The preserved program order of Intel-x86 instructions relevant to persistency. ✗ means two instructions can be
reordered, while ✓ means they are always ordered. CL means the pair of instructions is only ordered when on the same cache
line.

Earlier in Program Order

Later in Program Order
read

write

mfence

sfence

clflushopt

clflush

read

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

write

✗

✓

✓

✓

CL

✓

mfence

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

sfence

✗

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

clflushopt

✗

✗

✓

✓

✗

CL

clflush

✗

✓

✓

✓

CL

✓

an event identifier 𝑖 ∈ N, i.e. the index in the sequence of
instructions. For a given program, a state 𝑠 is defined as a
valuation of all shared variables, i.e. 𝑠 ∈ V𝑝 → Z.
2.2.2 Event Order Graph. Similar to the standard declarative methods in the literature [3, 17, 24, 40, 66], we represent
execution of a concurrent program by an event order graph
(EOG). However, executions on non-volatile memory are
slightly different from those on traditional DRAM, in that
system failure might happen before a program execution
finishes. Therefore, we distinguish between partial and total
executions, and adjust the definition of EOGs accordingly.
We first define a memory event:
Definition 2 (Event). An event 𝑒 is a triple (𝜏, 𝑖, 𝑙) where
𝜏 ∈ Tid is a thread identifier, 𝑖 ∈ N is an event identifier, and
𝑙 is an event label that can be one of the following:
• R(𝑥, 𝑣), marking the event as a read event, where 𝑣 is
the value read from the shared variable 𝑥,
• W(𝑥, 𝑣), marking the event as a write event, where 𝑣 is
the value stored to shared variable 𝑥,
• FL(𝑥), marking the event as a flush event, where all
pending stores to 𝑥 are forced to persist in the order
they are issued
• F, marking the event as a memory fence event, which
prevents reordering of events before and after it.
Remark 2 (Notation). Given an event label 𝑙, the functions
type, loc, and val returns the type (R,W,FL,F), location (𝑥),
value read or written (𝑣) of 𝑙 if applicable. Given an event
𝑒, the functions Tid, # and lab return the thread identifier,
event identifier and event label respectively. The functions
on event labels (type, loc etc.) are also lifted to events. For
a program 𝑃, we write 𝐸𝑃 for the set of memory events in
𝑃. The method to generate 𝐸𝑃 is straightforward [37] by
simulation of program execution, and we omit the details
here. We abuse the symbols R,W,FL,F for the set of events
with the corresponding label in 𝐸𝑃 .

Given a relation 𝑟 , we write 𝑟 + for the transitive closure of
𝑟 , and 𝑟 −1 for its inverse. Given a relation A, 𝑟 |𝐴 is 𝑟 restricted
to 𝐴. We write 𝑟 1 ; 𝑟 2 as the relation composition of the two
relations 𝑟 1 and 𝑟 2 . For a set of events 𝐸, 𝐸𝑥 is the subset of 𝐸
restricted to events on variable 𝑥, i.e. 𝐸𝑥 = {𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 | loc(𝑒) =
𝑥 }. For any ordering relation 𝑟 over 𝐸, we also write 𝑒 1 ≺𝑟 𝑒 2
for (𝑒 1, 𝑒 2 ) ∈ 𝑟 .
An EOG is then defined with respect to ordering relations
over memory events:
Definition 3 (Event Order Graph). An event order graph
𝐺 = (𝐸, 𝐸 0, po, rf) consists of a set of events 𝐸 and a subset of
initialization events 𝐸 0 ⊆ 𝐸 containing a single write event
to each shared variable. po, rf are relations over 𝐸 where,
• po ⊆ 𝐸 × 𝐸 is the program order, a total order of events
in each thread. Moreover, initialization events in 𝐸 0 are
ordered before the other events in 𝐸. po can be derived
syntactically from the program, i.e. po = {(𝑒 1, 𝑒 2 ) |
Tid(𝑒 1 ) = Tid(𝑒 2 ) ∧ #𝑒 1 < #𝑒 2 } ∪ (𝐸 0 × 𝐸 \ 𝐸 0 ).
• rf ⊆ (𝐸 ∩W) × (𝐸 ∩R) is the read-from relation between
write and read events on the same variable. Intuitively,
(𝑒 𝑤 , 𝑒𝑟 ) ∈ rf if 𝑒𝑟 reads the value written by 𝑒 𝑤 . It is
obvious that each read event should read from at most
1 , 𝑒 2 ∈ (𝐸 ∩W) and
one write event, i.e. for any events 𝑒 𝑤
𝑤
1
2
1 = 𝑒2 .
𝑒𝑟 ∈ (𝐸 ∩ R), (𝑒 𝑤 , 𝑒𝑟 ) ∈ rf ∧ (𝑒 𝑤 , 𝑒𝑟 ) ∈ rf → 𝑒 𝑤
𝑤
For convenience, we use 𝐺 .𝑥 to refer to the element of 𝐺,
where 𝑥 can be 𝐸, 𝐸 0 , po or rf. When the context is clear, we
write 𝐸, po etc. directly.
An event order graph 𝐺 represents a (total) execution of
a concurrent program 𝑃, if 𝐺 .𝐸 equals 𝐸𝑃 , and 𝐺 .rf assigns
a write event to each read event. In this case, the execution finishes without being interrupted by a potential crash.
However, not all executions are valid, or consistent, per the
underlying memory consistency model that prescribes allowed visibility order of memory operations.

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

Each memory consistency model 𝑀 essentially defines
a predicate over executions, denoted cons𝑀 (·), for the set
of valid executions under 𝑀. The memory consistency model
adopted in this paper is an extension of standard x86-TSO [58]
for Intel-x86 platform which identifies a global happensbefore order hb over all events. Unlike Sequential Consistency
(SC), only preserved program order (ppo), a subset po that can
not be reordered according to architecture specification, is
included in hb.
Table 1 summarizes the ordering constraints of relevant
instructions. It shows that writes and flushes might be reordered with later reads. The preserved program order ppo
is then formally defined as:
ppo ≜ {(𝑒 1, 𝑒 2 ) ∈ po | 𝑒 1 ∈ W ∪ FL → 𝑒 2 ∉ R}
To define happens-before order hb, we introduce coherence order (co):
Definition 4 (Coherence Order). Given an execution 𝐺, a
coherence order co ⊆ (𝐺 .𝐸 ∩ W) × (𝐺 .𝐸 ∩ W) is the disjoint
union of relations co𝑥 for each shared variable 𝑥 ∈ V𝑝 , where
co𝑥 is a strict total order on write events to 𝑥.
Orders within the same thread (called internal orders)
are distinguished from those across different threads (called
external orders), and we denote them with suffix i and e
respectively. For instance, rfi is the relation rf ∩ (po ∪
po−1 ). Additionally, given a coherence order co, the fromread relation fr between a write event and a read event is
derived as fr ≜ rf−1 ; co. Intuitively, if we have (𝑒 𝑤 , 𝑒𝑟 ) ∈ rf
′ ) ∈ co, 𝑒 must happen before 𝑒 ′ since 𝑒 would
and (𝑒 𝑤 , 𝑒 𝑤
𝑟
𝑟
𝑤
′ otherwise.
read from 𝑒 𝑤
Definition 5 (x86-TSO). An execution 𝐺 is valid under
x86-TSO, written consTSO (𝐺), if there is a coherence order
co such that
1. hb = (ppo ∪ rfe ∪ co ∪ fr) + is irreflexive,
2. fr; po is irreflexive (per-location coherence)
Each valid execution 𝐺 induces a (volatile) state 𝑠, where
for each 𝑥 ∈ V𝑝 , 𝑠 (𝑥) equals the value written by the last
write event to 𝑥 in hb. If 𝑠 is induced by some execution of
the program 𝑃, it is said to be a reachable state of 𝑃 under
x86-TSO.
2.3

Crash Consistency and Robustness

Crash consistency is an essential property of programs running on non-volatile memories. Given that the system may
crash at any time, it specifies that program execution can be
correctly resumed from the recovered non-volatile state, as
defined in Section 2.1. This essentially requires that the postcrash execution starting from the state does not terminate
unexpectedly (e.g. segmentation faults or assertion violation) or cause data corruption. However, most tools in the

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

literature rely on user annotation for crash consistency bug
detection, and the few automatic tools only detect observable bugs. To tackle the problem, robustness is proposed [22]
as a sufficient condition for crash consistency of lock-free
programs:
Definition 6 (Robustness). A program 𝑃 is robust iff all
reachable non-volatile states of 𝑃, as defined in Section 2.1,
are reachable under x86-TSO, as defined in Section 2.2.
In other words, the set of reachable non-volatile states
is subsumed by the set of reachable states under x86-TSO.
Crash consistency requires safe execution from any postcrash state. In this case, to prove crash consistency of a
robust program, we only need to apply existing methods for
ensuring correctness of a concurrent program under some
weak memory consistency model, which is x86-TSO in our
case. For a robust program, the problem in question is essentially reduced to the classical safety verification problem of
concurrent programs. Furthermore, since consistency checking and proving robustness are decoupled from each other,
this method is fully automated, and user annotation is not
needed.

3

Checking Reachability of a Non-volatile
State

In this paper, we focus on proving robustness. Since robustness is a universal property over non-volatile states, it is necessary to explore all non-volatile states and check if all states
are reachable per definitions in Section 2.1 and Section 2.2.
In this section, we focus on how to observe a potential nonvolatile state from the program and check reachability of the
post-crash state given a fixed pre-crash execution.
3.1

Recovery Observer

To enumerate non-volatile states efficiently, we leverage
recovery observer to instrument the program. Recovery observer is originally proposed in [52] as a hypothetical notion
that atomically observes the entire content of the NVM. It
is then adopted for verification of software performing file
I/O [38]. Unsurprisingly, the semantics of I/O operations
to storage devices are analogous to memory operations on
NVM. In fact, it has been utilized later for persistent invariant
checking [50].
Intuitively, recovery observer is a virtual thread that reads
each shared variable. As the recovery observer acts as an additional thread, the reads in it interleave with other memory
operations. By going through all possible interleaving of the
threads, each read also iterates through all possible writes.
It facilitates enumeration of states since we could rely on
the rf relation of these reads for a proper post-crash state.
Figure 2 shows an example program with recovery observer.
The third thread is the recovery observer with a read to each
shared variable in the program.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

x = 1;
flush x;
a = y;
x = a;

∥

y = 2;
flush y;
b = x;
y = b;

∥

r1 = x;
r2 = y;

Figure 2. An example of recovery observer. r1 = x; and r2
= y are not ordered.
To adopt recovery observer to our setting, we instrument
the program with the virtual thread and introduce a dedicated reads-from order for reads in this thread. Formally,
given a program 𝑃, its instrumented version is 𝑃 ′ = 𝑃 ∥ 𝑃𝑟 ,
where 𝑃𝑟 represents the recovery observer that contains an
instruction 𝑎𝑥 = 𝑥 for each 𝑥 ∈ V𝑝 . Let REC be the set of
events in the recovery observer 𝑃𝑟 , i.e. REC = {𝑒 ∈ 𝐸𝑃 ′ |
Tid(𝑒) = 𝑃𝑟 }. To ensure they could observe all states of the
program, these read events are not ordered with any other
events, and in particular, they are not ordered with each
other. We thus have the following definition of instrumented
execution:
Definition 7 (Instrumented Execution). An instrumented
execution 𝐺 𝑖 of 𝑃 is an execution of the instrumented program 𝑃 ∥ 𝑃𝑟 . In particular, it satisfies 𝐺 𝑖 .po∩(REC×𝐺 𝑖 .𝐸) = ∅
and 𝐺 𝑖 .po ∩ (𝐺 𝑖 .𝐸 × REC) = ∅.
We define the recovery read-from relation rrf of 𝐺 𝑖 as
the projection of the read-from relation to REC, i.e. rrf ≜
rf| (W×REC) . The relation induces an observed non-volatile
state 𝑠𝑜 such that for each shared variable 𝑥 ∈ V𝑝 , 𝑠𝑜 (𝑥)
equals the store read by REC𝑥 .
Once a non-volatile state 𝑠𝑜 is observed by the recovery
observer, the next step is to check reachability of 𝑠𝑜 under 𝐺 𝑖 ,
which is elaborated in Section 3.2. If 𝑠𝑜 is indeed a reachable
non-volatile state, we then need to check if 𝑠𝑜 is reachable
under x86-TSO, i.e. checking consTSO (·). While this is a wellstudied problem and not the topic of this paper, we note
that recovery observer can be tweaked for this purpose as
well. Briefly speaking, we retain the instrumented execution
𝐺 𝑖 , but group the read events in REC together as an atomic
block, i.e. we only allow it to read the whole memory simultaneously. In this way, the recovery observer now signifies
an equivalent volatile state instead. The details are given in
Section 4.
3.2

Reduction to Validity Checking

In this section, we check reachability of the observed nonvolatile state 𝑠𝑜 under a given execution. Reachability under
Px86, which is a more general problem than ours, has been
previously proved to be decidable [2], but no algorithmic
method is given. To solve the problem, the key is to reduce
it to an equivalent validity checking problem of a pre-crash
execution that is augmented with additional ordering constraints.

Zhilei Han and Fei He

To accomplish this, we leverage the derived TSO propagation order (dtpo) from [37] as a bridge between memory
consistency and persistency. Given an instrumented execution 𝐺 𝑖 of the program, we have:
Ø
dtpo ≜
FL𝑥 ×{𝑤 ∈ W𝑥 | ∃𝑤 ′ ∈ 𝑑𝑜𝑚(rrf), (𝑤 ′, 𝑤) ∈ co}
𝑥 ∈ V𝑝

dtpo orders any flush on the shared variable 𝑥 before any
store 𝑤 to 𝑥 that are co-ordered after the store 𝑤 ′ to 𝑥 read
by rrf. Note that although it is derived from the persistencyrelated relation rrf, it characterizes visibility order between
flushes and certain stores. The correctness of this derived
order can be seen by the following argument: if the flush
event is instead ordered after 𝑤, then all pending writes to
𝑥, including 𝑤, should be committed to the NVM. Since 𝑤
happens after 𝑤 ′ , it would overwrite 𝑤 ′ , which contradicts
the fact that 𝑤 ′ is the last write to 𝑥 that has persisted. Fig. 3
demonstrates a possible instrumented execution of the program in Fig. 2 where the state 𝑥 = 0; 𝑦 = 1; is observed. Since
the observer reads the initial value of 𝑥, which is ordered
before the store 𝑥 = 1, a dtpo ordering constraint is induced.
x=y=0
rrf
x=1

y=2
fr

dtpo

r1 = x
flush y

flush x
rf
a=y

rf

b=x
rrf

fr
x=a

r2 = y

y=b
recovery observer

Figure 3. Visualization of an event order graph representing
a possible instrumented execution of the program in Fig. 2,
where the state 𝑥 = 0; 𝑦 = 1; is observed by the recovery
observer. The execution is not valid under DPTSO per Definition 8 due to cycles induced by the dtpo order.
Our goal is to check if the observed non-volatile state 𝑠𝑜 ,
as induced by rrf, is reachable under 𝐺 𝑖 . Note the execution
𝐺 𝑖 only characterizes visibility order, and we do not know
the exact persist order nvo. A naive approach to check reachability is to enumerate all possible persist order, and check
whether the last persisted store to each shared variable conforms with 𝑠𝑜 . Nevertheless, it is redundant to consider all
possible orders. Even if we prune the search by leveraging
the two axioms for nvo (Definition 1), the exhaustive method
is still inefficient.
What matters in reachability checking is the last persisted
stores and the additional ordering constraints they generate
(dtpo). Therefore, the crux is to check if 𝐺 𝑖 is a valid execution under a memory model augmented with dtpo, called
DPTSO in [37]:

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

Definition 8 (DPTSO). An instrumented execution 𝐺 𝑖 is valid
under DPTSO, written consDPTSO (𝐺 𝑖 ), if there is a coherence
order co such that
1. hb = (ppo ∪ rfe ∪ co ∪ fr ∪ dtpo) + is irreflexive,
2. fr; po is irreflexive (per-location coherence)
The predicate consDPTSO (·) can be checked in an analogous way to checking consTSO (·), i.e. checking reachability
under x86-TSO, a classical problem that has been studied
extensively. It is basically a cycle detection algorithm on a directed graph where the orders rf, co, dtpo etc. are regarded
as edges. Since DPTSO only adds dtpo as a component in the
happens-before relation, existing methods for checking validity of a concurrent execution could be easily adopted. For
example, the execution depicted in Fig. 3 is not valid under
DPTSO due to cycles introduced by the extra dtpo edge.
The following theorem states the reduction is correct:
Theorem 1. Given an instrumented execution 𝐺 𝑖 valid under x86-TSO, the non-volatile state 𝑠𝑜 induced by rrf is
reachable under 𝐺 𝑖 iff consDPTSO (𝐺 𝑖 ) holds.
Proof. To clarify, we use suffixes TSO and DPTSO to distinguish the respective co and hb order in Definition 5 and
Definition 8. Assume that there are 𝑚 shared variables V𝑝 =
{𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑚 } and |𝐺 𝑖 .𝐸 ∩ W| + |𝐺 𝑖 .𝐸 ∩ FL| = 𝑛, i.e. there are 𝑛
store and flush events in total.
(←): Suppose consDPTSO (𝐺 𝑖 ) holds.
To prove 𝑠𝑜 is reachable, let coTSO = coDPTSO . We first arbitrarily construct a persist order nvo that satisfies the two
axioms per Definition 1. The first axiom requires nvo to conform with the per-location store order of hbTSO , which is
exactly coTSO in this case. Note nvo is a total order over all
stores and flushes. Let the sequence of events induced by
nvo be 𝑒 1, . . . , 𝑒𝑛 , and for each variable 𝑥𝑖 , let 𝑠𝑜 (𝑥𝑖 ) equals
the store 𝑒𝑘𝑖 where 1 ≤ 𝑘𝑖 ≤ 𝑛.
Let 𝑒 𝑓 be the last flush event in the sequence. Consider 𝑢 =
𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑘 1, 𝑘 2, . . . , 𝑘𝑚 , 𝑓 ). Now we have the prefix 𝑒¯ = 𝑒 1, . . . , 𝑒𝑢
and try to adjust nvo such that 𝑒¯ induces 𝑠𝑜 . In other words,
it requires ∀1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑚, ∀𝑘𝑖 < 𝑗 ≤ 𝑢.loc(𝑒 𝑗 ) ≠ 𝑥𝑖 holds.
This is ensured by repeatedly reordering events in nvo
while adhering to the two axioms. At each step, we pick a
shared variable 𝑥𝑖 for which the above condition does not
hold and find the event 𝑒𝑝 such that ∀𝑘𝑖 < 𝑗 ≤ 𝑢.loc(𝑒 𝑗 ) =
𝑥𝑖 → 𝑗 ≤ 𝑝, i.e. 𝑒𝑝 is the last store to 𝑥𝑖 in the range [𝑒𝑘𝑖 , 𝑒𝑢 ].
We then rearrange nvo so that 𝑒𝑝 succeeds 𝑒𝑢 . Apparently,
the new persist order does not infringe the first axiom, since
𝑒𝑝 is the last store in the range and no coTSO order is violated
by the reorder.
We now prove that the second axiom is not violated. From
the above assumption, we know (𝑒𝑘𝑖 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈ coTSO , so for
any flush event 𝑒𝑞 on 𝑥𝑖 we also have (𝑒𝑞 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈ dtpo. Since
consDPTSO (𝐺 𝑖 ) holds, the first requirement of Definition 8
gives (𝑒𝑝 , 𝑒𝑞 ) ∉ (ppo ∪ rf ∪ fr ∪ coDPTSO ) + which simplifies
to (𝑒𝑝 , 𝑒𝑞 ) ∉ hbTSO . In this case, the premise of the second

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

axiom does not hold, and thus 𝑒𝑝 is not nvo-ordered with
any flush events. 𝑒𝑝 is therefore safe to be reordered.
Since the reorder of 𝑒𝑝 in nvo does not violate the two
axioms, after finite steps, the prefix 𝑒¯ must satisfy the aforementioned condition and induces 𝑠𝑜 , thus we have proved 𝑠𝑜
is reachable under 𝐺 𝑖 .
(→): Suppose 𝑠𝑜 is reachable, then for some coTSO , hbTSO ,
there is a persist order nvo and its prefix 𝑒¯ = 𝑒 1, . . . , 𝑒𝑢 that
induces 𝑠𝑜 . Let coDPTSO = coTSO . For each variable 𝑥𝑖 , let 𝑠𝑜 (𝑥𝑖 )
equals the store 𝑒𝑘𝑖 where 1 ≤ 𝑘𝑖 ≤ 𝑢.
Assume some store 𝑒𝑝 to 𝑥𝑖 happens after 𝑒𝑘𝑖 , then (𝑒𝑘𝑖 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈
coTSO . By definition of a reachable state, we have 𝑝 > 𝑢. Note
that the prefix contains all flush events. Therefore, all flushes
𝑒𝑞 to 𝑥𝑖 must be nvo-ordered before 𝑒𝑝 . This entails that
(𝑒𝑞 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈ hbTSO , otherwise the first axiom of nvo is violated.
Now consider the validity of 𝐺 𝑖 under DPTSO. Requirement (2) of Definition 8 follows directly from Definition 5.
Suppose that requirement (1) is violated. Since 𝐺 𝑖 is valid
under x86-TSO, there must be a flush event 𝑒𝑞 , store event 𝑒𝑘𝑖
and 𝑒𝑝 on 𝑥𝑖 such that (𝑒𝑞 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈ dtpo and (𝑒𝑝 , 𝑒𝑞 ) ∈ hbDPTSO .
From the reasoning above, we have (𝑒𝑞 , 𝑒𝑝 ) ∈ hbTSO .
We now consider the path from 𝑒𝑝 to 𝑒𝑞 on the directed
graph. If no dtpo edge is on the path, then we have (𝑒𝑝 , 𝑒𝑞 ) ∈
hbTSO . If there are one or more dtpo edge on the directed
path, we note that any (𝑒𝑝′ , 𝑒𝑞′ ) ∈ dtpo entails (𝑒𝑝′ , 𝑒𝑞′ ) ∈
hbTSO by the argument above as well. Therefore we also have
(𝑒𝑝 , 𝑒𝑞 ) ∈ hbTSO In either case, it contradicts the assumption
that 𝐺 𝑖 is valid under x86-TSO. We hereby prove requirement
(1) holds, i.e. consDPTSO (𝐺 𝑖 ) holds.
□

4

Robustness Checking Algorithm

In this section, we discuss the general search-based framework for robustness checking. More specifically, we extend
the algorithm to partial executions and introduce the overall
exploration algorithm based on it.
Previously, reachability of states is defined with an assumption that all memory events have been propagated from
the store buffer and made visible to all threads before the
program terminates. This is in line with the Px86 and DPTSO
models. However, to verify programs running on NVM, it is
necessary to reason about crashes, and in particular when a
system failure would occur. Therefore, the verification algorithm must take partial executions into account.
Partial Executions. In Section 2.2, we defined a total
execution of a program 𝑃 as an EOG that contains all memory
events of a program, 𝐸𝑃 , and assigns a value to each read
event in rf. Likewise, a partial execution is an EOG that
assigns a value to each read in rf, but it contains only a
subset of all memory events 𝐸𝑃 . However, the events must
be prefix-closed. In other words, any event in the porf−prefix
of an event in the partial execution should also be contained
in the event set. This requirement corresponds to the fact
that when a system fails, only a prefix of the total execution

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

has been propagated. A partial instrumented execution is
defined similarly.
Take the total execution of the program in Fig. 2 as an
example, as depicted in Fig. 3. It is shown previously that
this execution is not valid under DPTSO, thus the state 𝑠𝑜 is
not reachable. Now consider the realistic scenario where the
instructions flush x; a = y; x = a; are not propagated
before the crash. In this case, we obtain a partial execution
as visualized below:
x=y=0
rrf
x=1

Zhilei Han and Fei He

of search tree pruning. Therefore, we abstract away the details and assume the exploration method provides the next
and hasNext interface for exploration, and block interface
to block a subset of partial instrumented executions. Section 5 will elaborate on this topic.
Remark 3 (Notation). We say the partial instrumented execution 𝐺 ′ is an expansion of partial instrumented execution
𝐺, written 𝐺 ≺ 𝐺 ′ , if 𝐺 .𝐸 ⊂ 𝐺 ′ .𝐸 and 𝐺 .rf ⊂ 𝐺 ′ .rf.
𝐺 ′ is an alternation of 𝐺, written 𝐺 ′ ⋍ 𝐺, if 𝐺 .𝐸 = 𝐺 ′ .𝐸
and 𝐺 .rrf = 𝐺 ′ .rrf (other orders in 𝐺 .rf and 𝐺 ′ .rf might
differ).

y=2
fr
r1 = x
flush y
rf
b=x
rrf

r2 = y

Algorithm 1: Robustness Checking Algorithm
Framework for Non-volatile Memories
input : A program 𝑃 running on non-volatile
memory.
output : If 𝑃 is robust.

y=b
recovery observer

Figure 4. A partial instrumented execution of the program
in Fig. 2, where the state 𝑥 = 0; 𝑦 = 1; is observed by the
recovery observer. No dtpo orders are derived since flush
events to 𝑥 are not in this partial execution. This execution
is valid under DPTSO.
It can be easily checked that this partial execution is valid
under DPTSO, and thus the state 𝑥 = 0; 𝑦 = 1; is a reachable
non-volatile state.
Exploration Algorithm. The reachability checking algorithm in Section 3 can be naturally lifted to partial executions
since dtpo is defined analogously on partial executions. An
exploration algorithm can then search through all partial
executions and states, and utilize the aforementioned reduction to check reachability of a state with a given partial
execution. Whenever a reachable non-volatile state is found,
robustness is checked locally first by checking reachability of
this state under x86-TSO. Robustness of the whole program
is established if no violation is found when the exploration
ends.
The presence of recovery observer has embedded a nonvolatile state in an instrumented execution, thus the exploration method only needs to search through all instrumented
partial executions. Besides, it allows that some events in REC
are not contained in the partial execution, i.e. it induces a
partial state. This boosts performance and allows our robustness checking algorithm to have the flexibility of leveraging
different search methods, from brute force searching to more
advanced stateless model checking with dynamic partial
order reduction, or simply relying on program encoding
and constraint solving. Our robustness checking algorithm
could be incorporated into any exploration method capable

1 𝑃

′ ← 𝑃 || 𝑃

𝑟

while hasNext(P’) do
3
𝐺 ← next(𝑃 ′ )
4
if consDPTSO (𝐺) holds then
5
foreach 𝐺 ′ ⋍ 𝐺 do
6
if consTSO (atomic(𝐺 ′ )) holds then
7
goto 2;

2

8
9
10
11

return false;
else
block({𝐺 ′ | 𝐺 ≺ 𝐺 ′ });
return true

The overall algorithm framework is shown in Algorithm 1.
The input program is first instrumented with recovery observer, then the exploration method takes over the search.
Each time a partial execution 𝐺 is yielded, a partial state is
also generated. We first check if it is reachable under the
current execution, i.e. if consDPTSO (𝐺) holds. If not, we make
sure not to extend 𝐺 and further explore its expansion, since
an invalid execution with additional ordering constraints is
still invalid under DPTSO (Line 10). This optimization can be
implemented in most search methods. In depth-first searching, for instance, the search immediately backtracks to avoid
further redundant exploration.
If 𝐺 exhibits a reachable non-volatile state 𝑠𝑜 , the next
step is to check if 𝑠𝑜 is reachable under the x86-TSO model,
which typically involves another search over all total executions (Line 5). There are abundant algorithms for this
task in the literature. In our algorithm, we take advantage of
the recovery observer by regarding the read events in them
as an atomic block and keeping the rrf orders. The formal
definition of atomic is as follows:

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

Definition 9. Given a partial instrumented execution 𝐺 ′ ,
regarding the recovery observer as atomic block yield the
partial execution atomic(𝐺 ′ ) = (𝐸 ′, 𝐸 0′ , po′, rf′ ) such that
• 𝐸 ′ = (𝐺 ′ .𝐸 \ REC) ∪ {𝑒𝑟 }
• 𝐸 0′ = 𝐸 0
• po′ = po
• rf′ = rf \ rrf ∪ {(𝑒 1, 𝑒𝑟 ) | ∃𝑒 2 ∈ REC.(𝑒 1, 𝑒 2 ) ∈ rrf}
where 𝑒𝑟 is a fresh event with Tid(𝑒𝑟 ) = 𝑃𝑟 .
Intuitively, this allows the recovery observer to signify an
equivalent volatile state. As an example, Fig. 5 shows how to
check validity of an execution under x86-TSO with the help
of recovery observer.

7). If all executions have been explored and no violation is
found, 𝑃 has been proved robust (Line 11). It can be easily
shown that the algorithm is sound.
Theorem 2. For a given program 𝑃, if Algorithm 1 terminates and returns false (resp. true), 𝑃 is guaranteed to be
non-robust (resp. robust).

5

rrf
x=1

y=2
fr
r1 = x
r2 = y
flush y

recovery observer
(atomic block)

rf
b=x

rrf

y=b

Figure 5. Visualization of validity checking of the execution
in Fig. 4, where the recovery observer is regarded as an
atomic block. It is invalid under x86-TSO due to the cycle in
red.

Integration with DPLL(T)

Algorithm 1 is parameterized by an exploration method. In
this section, we instantiate our algorithm to leverage program encoding and constraint solving for this task.
5.1

x=y=0

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Encoding

A complete encoding of a concurrent program should cover
both functional program behaviours and possible interleaving of the threads, i.e. the orders between memory events.
Following the standard encoding [3], the input program is
firstly transformed into SSA form and the program event set
𝐸𝑃 . The instructions in each thread, including the recovery
observer in our case, are then naturally translated to atoms
in first-order logic3 . As a simple example, the program in
Fig. 2 is encoded as:
𝜌𝑠𝑠𝑎 = 𝑥 0 = 0 ∧ 𝑦0 = 0

(first thread)

∧ 𝑦2 = 2 ∧ 𝑏 = 𝑥 3 ∧ 𝑦3 = 𝑏

(second thread)

∧ 𝑟 1 = 𝑥 4 ∧ 𝑟 2 = 𝑦4
While searching through total executions, we only alter
other rf orders, keeping 𝐺 .𝐸 the same. Essentially, enumerating alternations of 𝐺 is enough for checking reachability under x86-TSO, The correctness of this optimization is shown
in the following lemma:
Lemma 1. If for every alternation 𝐺 ′ of 𝐺, consTSO (𝐺 ′ ) does
not hold, then the observed state 𝑠𝑜 must be unreachable
under x86-TSO.
Proof. Suppose the state is reachable under x86-TSO and let
𝐺 ′′ be an execution that induces this state, thus consTSO (𝐺 ′′ )
holds. Since x86-TSO (Definition 5) only requires acyclicity
of certain orders, by restricting 𝐺 ′′ .𝐸 and the ordering constraints of 𝐺 ′′ on 𝐺, we can always construct an execution
𝐺 ′ such that consTSO (𝐺 ′ ) also holds. 𝐺 ′ is an alternation of
𝐺, thus contradicts with the assumption.
□
If the state 𝑠𝑜 is proved unreachable under x86-TSO in this
way, we report violation of robustness (Line 8). Note that 𝑠𝑜
might be a partial state, but it is obvious that any total state
that conforms with 𝑠𝑜 is still invalid under x86-TSO. Therefore, we could always add rrf orders that read from the last
store per co. This way validity under DPTSO is not affected.
On the other hand, if 𝑠𝑜 is reachable, once its reachability is
proven we proceed with the exploration of executions (Line

(initial value)

∧ 𝑥 1 = 1 ∧ 𝑎 = 𝑦1 ∧ 𝑥 2 = 𝑎

(recovery observer)

Note that it does not encode ordering relations. The read
𝑦1 , for instance, could potentially read from 𝑦0, 𝑦2 and 𝑦3 . To
add ordering constraints to the encoding, we first model a
partial execution by a predicate enabled (implemented as a
Boolean variable) defined for every event, where enabled(𝑒)
signifies 𝑒 is included in the partial execution. Furthermore,
each order relations used in x86-TSO or DPTSO are represented by Boolean variables explicitly. For instance, since
the coherence order co is total, it is encoded by adding a
𝑥 for each pair of stores 𝑥 and 𝑥 to the
Boolean variable ws𝑖,𝑗
𝑖
𝑗
𝑥 is assigned
shared variable 𝑥. We have (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥 𝑗 ) ∈ co iff ws𝑖,𝑗
true. Additional axioms are included in the encoding that
constrain its assignment:
co
𝑥
𝜌𝑖,𝑗
= ws𝑖,𝑗
→ enabled(𝑥𝑖 ) ∧ enabled(𝑥 𝑗 )
𝑥
∧ ws𝑖,𝑗
→ 𝑥𝑖 ≺co 𝑥 𝑗

(ws-cond)
(ws-order)

𝑥
∧ (enabled(𝑥𝑖 ) ∧ enabled(𝑥 𝑗 )) → ws𝑖,𝑗
∨ ws𝑥𝑗,𝑖

(ws-some)
3 flush and fence operations are not included in the functional encoding of

a program since they are irrelevant. However, they are still numbered and
contribute to ordering constraints.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Zhilei Han and Fei He
SMT formula Ψ

Similarly, we introduce for each variable 𝑥 a Boolean variables rf𝑥𝑗,𝑖 for any read 𝑥𝑖 and store 𝑥 𝑗 and axioms for rf as
follows:

Satisfiable model 𝑀 for 𝐵(Ψ)

SAT Solver

𝑥
𝜌 rf
𝑗,𝑖 = rf 𝑗,𝑖 → enabled(𝑥𝑖 ) ∧ enabled(𝑥 𝑗 ) ∧ 𝑥 𝑗 = 𝑥𝑖

𝐵(Ψ) is unsatisfiable
Ψ is unsatisfiable

(rf-val)
∧ rf𝑥𝑗,𝑖 → 𝑥 𝑗 ≺rf 𝑥𝑖
∧ enabled(𝑥𝑖 ) →

(rf-ord)
Ü

rf𝑥𝑗,𝑖

Theory Solver

𝑀 is T-consistent
𝑀 is T-inconsistent, Add a conflict clause to Ψ
Ψ is satisfiable

Figure 6. Overview of the DPLL(T) framework.

(rf-some)

𝑥 𝑗 ∈W𝑥

Since fr can be derived from rf and co as discussed in
Section 2, for each variable 𝑥, we introduce the following
axiom for any two stores 𝑥 𝑗 , 𝑥𝑘 and read 𝑥𝑖 :
𝑥
𝑥
𝜌 fr
𝑗,𝑖,𝑘 = rf 𝑗,𝑖 ∧ ws 𝑗,𝑘 → 𝑟 𝑥𝑖 ≺fr 𝑤 𝑥𝑘

For dtpo, we need the flush event to be enabled. Thus, for
each variable 𝑥, we introduce the following axiom for any
two stores 𝑥 𝑗 , 𝑥𝑘 , read event 𝑥𝑖 in the recovery observer, and
flush FL𝑞𝑥 :
dtpo
𝜌𝑞,𝑗,𝑖,𝑘
= enabled(FL𝑞𝑥 ) ∧ rf𝑥𝑗,𝑖 ∧ ws𝑥𝑗,𝑘 → FL𝑞𝑥 ≺dtpo 𝑤 𝑥𝑘

To ensure the prefix-closed property of a partial execution, encoding for each ordering relation requires the pair of
events to be both enabled (e.g. the rule ws-cond and rf-val
above), and an extra axiom is added to the encoding: for
any two events 𝑒 1 and 𝑒 2 that are ordered by ppo, we have
enabled(𝑒 2 ) → enabled(𝑒 1 ). The encoding of the program
co, 𝜌 rf etc.)
Ψ is then the conjunction of 𝜌𝑠𝑠𝑎 and all axioms (𝜌𝑖,𝑗
𝑗,𝑖
related to ordering constraints.
5.2

DPLL(T) and Exploration

The encoded formula of the program Ψ is solved by an SMT
solver. While it searches for a model of the formula, variables in it are assigned values. In particular, the assignment
of Boolean variables representing various order relations
corresponds to a partial execution and state. Modern SMT
solvers typically utilize the DPLL(T) framework. In the framework, formulas are in a combination of certain first-order
background theories. Each background theory T has a theory solver which decides T -satisfiability of a conjunction of
literals in T . An overview of this framework is shown in
Fig. 6.
In this framework, each atom in the given formula Ψ is
first replaced by a Boolean variable, and the satisfiability
of the resulting propositional formula 𝐵(Ψ) is checked by
an SAT solver. If 𝐵(Ψ) is unsatisfiable, so is Ψ. Otherwise,
since 𝐵(Ψ) is an over-approximation of Ψ, theory solvers are
called to check if the model 𝑀 returned by the SAT solver is
compatible with the underlying background theories. The
theory solver also returns a conflict clause to prevent the SAT
solver from exploring the same assignment.

Following [24], while DPLL(T) controls the exploration, in
our implementation each ordering constraints in the formula,
such as 𝑤 𝑥𝑖 ≺ws 𝑤 𝑥 𝑗 from ws-order above, are passed to a
dedicated theory solver for robustness checking. Based on
the solver for ordering consistency theory, the backend employs an incremental cycle detection algorithm for efficient
checking validity under DPTSO. If the current partial state is
reachable, we use the solver in [15] to check its reachability
under x86-TSO. Otherwise, a conflict clause is generated and
returned to the DPLL(T) framework which blocks further
exploration of this partial instrumented execution.

6

Implementation and Evaluation

We have implemented our method in a prototype tool called
PMVerify, expanding on Deagle [25], a concurrent program
verification tool that supports weak memory consistency on
top of the bounded model checker CBMC [42]. We extend
Deagle’s frontend to recognize NVM programs using a selected set of APIs in pmemobj library from PMDK [27]. A
dedicated backend for robustness checking is implemented
to complement the default solver of Deagle for weak memory consistency checking.
To evaluate the efficacy of PMVerify, we collect the example programs that accompany the pmemobj library in PMDK
as the benchmark. It contains 26 small to medium-sized programs (548 LOC on average) that implement simple algorithms and basic data structures on non-volatile memory,
such as binary search and persistent lists.
As a comparison, we also run PSan [22], the only robustness violation detection tool in the literature, on the same
benchmark. PSan is implemented based on the dynamic
model checking tool Jaaru [23] which observes the outcome
of memory operations at runtime and checks for persistency
bug on the observed trace. PSan offers a model checking
mode that exhaustively enumerates program traces, as well
as a random mode that relies on randomly sampled traces.
The experiments are conducted on an Intel® Core™ i510400 @ 2.90GHz CPU with 16GB memory. Timeout is set to
two hours. For PSan running in random mode, the maximum
amount of sampled traces is set to 100,000.

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

Table 2. Evaluation of PMVerify and PSan on the PMDK
pmemobj benchmarks (26 programs in total). PSan* signifies PSan running in model checking mode. The rows
YES/No/UNKNOWN contain the total number of cases each
tool proves to be robust, non-robust, or fails to give an answer. Unique No. is the number of cases only solved by this
tool.
PMVerify
YES
1
No
12
UNKNOWN
13
Unique No.
7
Average Time
2768.42s
Standard Deviation 1045.26s

6.1

PSan

PSan*

0
6
20
0
16.7s
9.98s

0
0
26
0
5.7s
2.8s

Experimental Results on PMDK benchmark

Table 2 shows the overall results of the experiment. Out
of 26 programs, PMVerify is able to solve 13. PMVerify
also successfully proves robustness of one of the programs
(manpage.c), and detects robustness violation of 12 test programs. PSan solves 6 cases when it is in random sampling
mode, and terminates unexpectedly in model checking mode.
The results are manually checked to ensure soundness, and
the robustness violations detected by PMVerify are summarized in Table 3. PMVerify fails on the remaining programs
mainly due to usage of PMDK primitives that are not modeled
by the frontend, such as pmemobj_tx_add_range_direct,
and timeouts on one program it supports.
In terms of performance, PMVerify takes around 45 minutes to complete verification on average. PSan, on the other
hand, takes no more than a minute for the six cases it solves,
which is on average 33 times shorter than PMVerify. We
note that PSan is a dynamic tool and could very efficiently
test potential bugs in the program due to its dynamic nature.
However, it cannot verify robustness. PMVerify has adopted
some optimization methods to improve the performance of
exploration, but still faces the common state explosion problem. The robustness checking problem is inherently hard to
mitigate the necessary exploration. Therefore, our method
and PSan can complement each other in robustness verification and bug detection.
6.2

Evaluation on robust programs

The robust case PMVerify solves, manpage.c, is a simple
program that opens a persistency memory pool and does
nothing. In this section, to further demonstrate the ability
of PMVerify to handle robust program, we manage to instrument each of the 12 non-robust programs to manually
produce a set of robust programs.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Table 3. Summary of robustness violation detected by
PMVerify
Program

Cause of Violation

btree

in btree_node_construct, stores
might persist out of order before
flushed
buffons_needle_problem non-atomic stores to struct
my_root
queue
in queue_constructor, stores
might persist out of order before
flushed
in pi_task_construct, stores
pi
might persist out of order before
flushed
examine_arttree
no persist barrier in get_examine
arttree
non-atomic stores in art_insert
fifo
non-atomic stores to linked list
data_store
non-atomic stores in insert_rand_items
mapcli
no
persist
barrier
in
str_insert_random
main
non-atomic stores to persistent
pool
pminvader
in create_alien, stores might persist out of order before flushed
pminvader2
no persist barrier in create_star

More specifically, we insert a cache line flush instruction after each memory operation. In this way, the instrumented program is guaranteed to be robust. We then run
both PMVerify and PSan on this new benchmark.
Table 4 shows the results of PMVerify and PSan running
on the set of instrumented programs. PMVerify is able to
prove robustness of six programs with an average running
time of 4734.15 seconds, including the medium-sized programs examine_arttree and data_store. This shows the
ability to scale to larger robust programs.
Due to the increase in program size, the performance
of PMVerify on this benchmark degrades by around half.
We note that although adding a flush operation after every
memory operation introduces considerable redundancy and
increases the overall exploration space, the set of reachable
non-volatile states is smaller because of stronger constraints.
Since PMVerify checks for reachability under DPTSO model
first, we can avoid later steps of checking x86-TSO consistency for some states. Therefore, the running time of PMVerify does not grow exponentially. In fact, all cases could be
finished within three hours if we do not consider time limits,
with an average running time of 6712 seconds. This shows
the efficacy of our tool PMVerify when handling robust
programs.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Table 4. Evaluation results of PMVerify on 12 instrumented
programs. PSan is unable to prove robustness of any program.
Program

LOC

PMVerify Time (s)

btree

493

5468.95

buffons_needle_problem

432

timeout

queue

551

timeout

pi

570

3565.19

examine_arttree

6379

7021.70

arttree

1793

timeout

fifo

207

4677.78

data_store

5512

timeout

mapcli

742

timeout

main

195

1765.79

pminvader

95

timeout

pminvader2

67

5905.49

1420

4734.15

Average

7

Related Works and Limitations

Persistent Models. The early studies on NVMs rely on
certain persistency models, an extension of memory consistency models, to prescribe constraints on the persistence
order. In [52], Pelly et al. classified these models into three
categories: strict persistency, epoch persistency and strand
persistency. The original definition of robustness in [22] is
based on strict persistency, the strongest model where any
recovered state is guaranteed to be an observable volatile
state [14, 31].
Epoch persistency under sequential consistency is described in [52], while [32] proposes a persist barrier implementation that works on x86-TSO [58]. The first formal definition of epoch persistency is given by [30] under release
consistency, and [54] formally describes operational and
declarative semantics of epoch persistency under x86-TSO.
StrandWeaver [21] implements strand persistency in hardware to minimally constrain persists to NVMs.
Recently, a line of work focused on formally defining
the persistency model of hardware architecture. [56] develops PARMv8 model for ARMv8, followed by Px86 [55]
for Intel-x86. Later, the PEx86 model [53] is proposed with
formalized semantics of non-temporal stores. Alternative
models such as DPTSO [37] and view-based models for Intelx86 and Armv8 [10] are proposed to further develop these
formalisms.
Memory consistency checking. The essential idea of
multi-threaded program verification is to explore the possible executions caused by thread interleaving. [3] gives a

Zhilei Han and Fei He

framework for using partial order relations to model possible
executions and encode program behaviors into a formula.
Several works expand on this idea and rely on bounded model
checking, such as lazy sequentialization [28] and a line of
work that employs the scheduling constraints-based abstraction refinement method (SCAR) [64–66]. [17] proposes to
solve the difference logic-based ordering constraints more efficiently with DPLL(T) framework. [24] proposes an ordering
consistency theory and integrates a dedicated theory solver
into the DPLL(T) routine, which is extended to weak memory consistency in [15]. On the other hand, stateless model
checking (SMC) methods enumerate all interleavings with
respect to an equivalence class, i.e. a Mazurkiewicz trace.
Several algorithms have been proposed to further weaken
the ordering requirement and efficiently explore the search
space [1, 39, 40].
Persistency Bug Detection. Several tools have been developed to assist persistent programming, including testing
applications such as XFDetector [46], PMTest [47] and PMDebugger [12]. Yat [44] is a model checker that exhaustively
explores all persistence orders and crash points. The model
checker Jaaru [23] reduces search space by focusing on the
last writes to each location. To our knowledge, the only automated verification tool for persistent memories is introduced
in [50], which utilizes an SMT-based method to formally
verify persistent invariants.
Limitations. PMVerify is implemented upon the bounded
model checking framework of CBMC, which unrolls loops
that are not statically bounded. While this method has been
widely used for program verification, it does leave the implementation incomplete in terms of proving robustness. We
note that this drawback could be mitigated by adopting other
exploration methods, as described in Section 4.
On the other hand, while robustness facilitates automation, its over-strength might disallow certain benign programming idioms. A few works in the literature (e.g. [49])
propose to weaken the definition of robustness, which is an
interesting direction for future work.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to check robustness, a sufficient condition for crash consistency of lock-free
programs running on non-volatile memories. Our algorithm
employs a search method to explore all partial executions
and non-volatile states, and check reachability of the state
under the pre-crash execution. This is achieved by reducing
the reachability checking problem to checking validity of an
instrumented execution under an alternative model DPTSO.
Our implementation is based on encoding the program into
a SMT formula and constraint solving. It succeeds in establishing robustness of a set of example programs in PMDK

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory

while the dynamic robustness violation detection tool PSan
fails. PMVerify is also able to detect robustness violations.

References
[1] Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Stavros Aronis, Mohamed Faouzi Atig, Bengt
Jonsson, Carl Leonardsson, and Konstantinos Sagonas. Stateless model
checking for TSO and PSO. Acta Informatica, 54(8):789–818, December
2017.
[2] Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Mohamed Faouzi Atig, Ahmed Bouajjani,
K. Narayan Kumar, and Prakash Saivasan. Deciding reachability under
persistent x86-TSO. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 5(POPL):1–32, January 2021.
[3] Jade Alglave, Daniel Kroening, and Michael Tautschnig. Partial Orders
for Efficient Bounded Model Checking of Concurrent Software. In
Natasha Sharygina and Helmut Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verification, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 141–157, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2013. Springer.
[4] Joy Arulraj and Andrew Pavlo. How to Build a Non-Volatile Memory Database Management System. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’17, pages
1753–1758, New York, NY, USA, May 2017. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[5] Hans-J. Boehm and Dhruva R. Chakrabarti. Persistence programming
models for non-volatile memory. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 51(11):55–67,
June 2016.
[6] Daniel Castro, Paolo Romano, and João Barreto. Hardware Transactional Memory meets memory persistency. Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, 130:63–79, August 2019.
[7] Dhruva R. Chakrabarti, Hans-J. Boehm, and Kumud Bhandari. Atlas:
Leveraging locks for non-volatile memory consistency. ACM SIGPLAN
Notices, 49(10):433–452, October 2014.
[8] Youmin Chen, Jiwu Shu, Jiaxin Ou, and Youyou Lu. HiNFS: A Persistent
Memory File System with Both Buffering and Direct-Access. ACM
Transactions on Storage, 14(1):4:1–4:30, April 2018.
[9] Zhangyu Chen, Yu Hua, Yongle Zhang, and Luochangqi Ding. Efficiently detecting concurrency bugs in persistent memory programs. In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS
’22, pages 873–887, New York, NY, USA, February 2022. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[10] Kyeongmin Cho, Sung-Hwan Lee, Azalea Raad, and Jeehoon Kang.
Revamping hardware persistency models: View-based and axiomatic
persistency models for Intel-x86 and Armv8. In Proceedings of the 42nd
ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation, PLDI 2021, pages 16–31, New York, NY,
USA, June 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[11] Joel Coburn, Adrian M. Caulfield, Ameen Akel, Laura M. Grupp, Rajesh K. Gupta, Ranjit Jhala, and Steven Swanson. NV-Heaps: Making
persistent objects fast and safe with next-generation, non-volatile
memories. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 39(1):105–118,
March 2011.
[12] Bang Di, Jiawen Liu, Hao Chen, and Dong Li. Fast, flexible, and
comprehensive bug detection for persistent memory programs. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS
’21, pages 503–516, New York, NY, USA, April 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[13] Subramanya R. Dulloor, Sanjay Kumar, Anil Keshavamurthy, Philip
Lantz, Dheeraj Reddy, Rajesh Sankaran, and Jeff Jackson. System
software for persistent memory. In Proceedings of the Ninth European
Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’14, pages 1–15, New York,
NY, USA, April 2014. Association for Computing Machinery.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

[14] Per Ekemark, Yuan Yao, Alberto Ros, Konstantinos Sagonas, and Stefanos Kaxiras. TSOPER: Efficient Coherence-Based Strict Persistency.
In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), pages 125–138, February 2021.
[15] Hongyu Fan, Zhihang Sun, and Fei He. Satisfiability Modulo Ordering
Consistency Theory for SC, TSO, and PSO Memory Models. ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 45(1):6:1–6:37,
March 2023.
[16] Xinwei Fu, Wook-Hee Kim, Ajay Paddayuru Shreepathi, Mohannad
Ismail, Sunny Wadkar, Dongyoon Lee, and Changwoo Min. Witcher:
Systematic Crash Consistency Testing for Non-Volatile Memory KeyValue Stores. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’21, pages 100–115, New York, NY,
USA, October 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[17] Cunjing Ge, Feifei Ma, Jeff Huang, and Jian Zhang. SMT Solving for the
Theory of Ordering Constraints. In Xipeng Shen, Frank Mueller, and
James Tuck, editors, Languages and Compilers for Parallel Computing,
pages 287–302, Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing.
[18] Kaan Genç, Michael D. Bond, and Guoqing Harry Xu. Crafty: Efficient,
HTM-compatible persistent transactions. In Proceedings of the 41st
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2020, pages 59–74, New York, NY, USA, June 2020.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[19] Jerrin Shaji George, Mohit Verma, Rajesh Venkatasubramanian, and
Pratap Subrahmanyam. Go-pmem: Native support for programming
persistent memory in go. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 20), pages 859–872. USENIX Association, July 2020.
[20] Ellis Giles, Kshitij Doshi, and Peter Varman. Continuous checkpointing
of HTM transactions in NVM. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 52(9):70–81,
June 2017.
[21] Vaibhav Gogte, William Wang, Stephan Diestelhorst, Peter M. Chen,
Satish Narayanasamy, and Thomas F. Wenisch. Relaxed Persist Ordering Using Strand Persistency. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 652–665,
May 2020.
[22] Hamed Gorjiara, Weiyu Luo, Alex Lee, Guoqing Harry Xu, and Brian
Demsky. Checking robustness to weak persistency models. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2022, pages 490–505,
New York, NY, USA, June 2022.
[23] Hamed Gorjiara, Guoqing Harry Xu, and Brian Demsky. Jaaru: Efficiently model checking persistent memory programs. In Proceedings
of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’21, pages
415–428, New York, NY, USA, April 2021. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[24] Fei He, Zhihang Sun, and Hongyu Fan. Satisfiability modulo ordering consistency theory for multi-threaded program verification. In
Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2021, pages
1264–1279, New York, NY, USA, June 2021. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[25] Fei He, Zhihang Sun, and Hongyu Fan. Deagle: An SMT-based Verifier
for Multi-threaded Programs (Competition Contribution). In Dana
Fisman and Grigore Rosu, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pages 424–428, Cham, 2022. Springer
International Publishing.
[26] Terry Ching-Hsiang Hsu, Helge Brügner, Indrajit Roy, Kimberly Keeton, and Patrick Eugster. NVthreads: Practical Persistence for Multithreaded Applications. In Proceedings of the Twelfth European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’17, pages 468–482, New York, NY,
USA, April 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[27] Intel Corporation.
Persistent Memory Development Kit.
https://pmem.io/pmdk/, 2023.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
[28] Omar Inverso, Ermenegildo Tomasco, Bernd Fischer, Salvatore
La Torre, and Gennaro Parlato. Bounded Model Checking of Multithreaded C Programs via Lazy Sequentialization. In Armin Biere and
Roderick Bloem, editors, Computer Aided Verification, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 585–602, Cham, 2014. Springer International
Publishing.
[29] Joseph Izraelevitz, Terence Kelly, and Aasheesh Kolli. Failure-Atomic
Persistent Memory Updates via JUSTDO Logging. ACM SIGARCH
Computer Architecture News, 44(2):427–442, March 2016.
[30] Joseph Izraelevitz, Hammurabi Mendes, and Michael L. Scott. Linearizability of Persistent Memory Objects Under a Full-System-Crash
Failure Model. In Cyril Gavoille and David Ilcinkas, editors, Distributed
Computing, pages 313–327, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016. Springer.
[31] Jungi Jeong and Changhee Jung. PMEM-spec: Persistent memory
speculation (strict persistency can trump relaxed persistency). In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS
’21, pages 517–529, New York, NY, USA, April 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[32] Arpit Joshi, Vijay Nagarajan, Marcelo Cintra, and Stratis Viglas. Efficient persist barriers for multicores. In Proceedings of the 48th International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO-48, pages 660–671,
New York, NY, USA, December 2015. Association for Computing Machinery.
[33] Rohan Kadekodi, Se Kwon Lee, Sanidhya Kashyap, Taesoo Kim,
Aasheesh Kolli, and Vijay Chidambaram. SplitFS: Reducing software
overhead in file systems for persistent memory. In Proceedings of
the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’19,
pages 494–508, New York, NY, USA, October 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[34] Tomasz Kapela. An introduction to pmemcheck (part 1) - basics. https://pmem.io/blog/2015/07/an-introduction-to-pmemcheckpart-1-basics/, July 2015.
[35] T. Kawahara, K. Ito, R. Takemura, and H. Ohno. Spin-transfer torque
RAM technology: Review and prospect. Microelectronics Reliability,
52(4):613–627, April 2012.
[36] Terence Kelly. Is persistent memory persistent? Communications of
the ACM, 63(9):48–54, August 2020.
[37] Artem Khyzha and Ori Lahav. Taming x86-TSO persistency. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 5(POPL):1–29, January
2021.
[38] Michalis Kokologiannakis, Ilya Kaysin, Azalea Raad, and Viktor
Vafeiadis. PerSeVerE: Persistency semantics for verification under
ext4. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 5(POPL):43:1–
43:29, January 2021.
[39] Michalis Kokologiannakis, Iason Marmanis, Vladimir Gladstein, and
Viktor Vafeiadis. Truly stateless, optimal dynamic partial order reduction. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 6(POPL):49:1–
49:28, January 2022.
[40] Michalis Kokologiannakis and Viktor Vafeiadis. HMC: Model Checking
for Hardware Memory Models. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’20, pages 1157–1171, New
York, NY, USA, March 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[41] Michalis Kokologiannakis and Viktor Vafeiadis. GenMC: A Model
Checker for Weak Memory Models. In Alexandra Silva and K. Rustan M. Leino, editors, Computer Aided Verification, pages 427–440,
Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.
[42] Daniel Kroening and Michael Tautschnig. CBMC – C Bounded Model
Checker. In Erika Ábrahám and Klaus Havelund, editors, Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pages 389–391,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014. Springer.
[43] Youngjin Kwon, Henrique Fingler, Tyler Hunt, Simon Peter, Emmett
Witchel, and Thomas Anderson. Strata: A Cross Media File System.

Zhilei Han and Fei He
In Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
SOSP ’17, pages 460–477, New York, NY, USA, October 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[44] Philip Lantz, Subramanya Dulloor, Sanjay Kumar, Rajesh Sankaran,
and Jeff Jackson. Yat: A validation framework for persistent memory
software. In 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
14), pages 433–438, Philadelphia, PA, June 2014. USENIX Association.
[45] Qingrui Liu, Joseph Izraelevitz, Se Kwon Lee, Michael L. Scott, Sam H.
Noh, and Changhee Jung. iDO: Compiler-Directed Failure Atomicity
for Nonvolatile Memory. In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 258–270, October
2018.
[46] Sihang Liu, Korakit Seemakhupt, Yizhou Wei, Thomas Wenisch,
Aasheesh Kolli, and Samira Khan. Cross-Failure Bug Detection in
Persistent Memory Programs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’20, pages 1187–1202, New
York, NY, USA, March 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[47] Sihang Liu, Yizhou Wei, Jishen Zhao, Aasheesh Kolli, and Samira Khan.
PMTest: A Fast and Flexible Testing Framework for Persistent Memory
Programs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, ASPLOS ’19, pages 411–425, New York, NY, USA, April 2019.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[48] Virendra J. Marathe, Margo Seltzer, Steve Byan, and Tim Harris. Persistent memcached: Bringing legacy code to Byte-Addressable persistent
memory. In 9th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Storage and File
Systems (HotStorage 17), Santa Clara, CA, July 2017. USENIX Association.
[49] Roy Margalit and Ori Lahav. Verifying observational robustness
against a c11-style memory model. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 5(POPL):4:1–4:33, January 2021.
[50] Iason Marmanis and Viktor Vafeiadis. SMT-Based Verification of Persistency Invariants of Px86 Programs. In Akash Lal and Stefano Tonetta,
editors, Verified Software. Theories, Tools and Experiments., Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 92–110, Cham, 2023. Springer International Publishing.
[51] Diego Ongaro, Stephen M. Rumble, Ryan Stutsman, John Ousterhout,
and Mendel Rosenblum. Fast crash recovery in RAMCloud. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, SOSP ’11, pages 29–41, New York, NY, USA, October 2011.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[52] Steven Pelley, Peter M. Chen, and Thomas F. Wenisch. Memory persistency. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 42(3):265–276,
June 2014.
[53] Azalea Raad, Luc Maranget, and Viktor Vafeiadis. Extending Intel-x86
consistency and persistency: Formalising the semantics of Intel-x86
memory types and non-temporal stores. Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, 6(POPL):1–31, January 2022.
[54] Azalea Raad and Viktor Vafeiadis. Persistence semantics for weak
memory: Integrating epoch persistency with the TSO memory model.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 2(OOPSLA):137:1–
137:27, October 2018.
[55] Azalea Raad, John Wickerson, Gil Neiger, and Viktor Vafeiadis. Persistency semantics of the Intel-x86 architecture. Proceedings of the ACM
on Programming Languages, 4(POPL):11:1–11:31, January 2020.
[56] Azalea Raad, John Wickerson, and Viktor Vafeiadis. Weak persistency
semantics from the ground up: Formalising the persistency semantics of ARMv8 and transactional models. Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, 3(OOPSLA):135:1–135:27, October 2019.
[57] Jinglei Ren, Jishen Zhao, Samira Khan, Jongmoo Choi, Yongwei Wu,
and Onur Mutlu. ThyNVM: Enabling software-transparent crash
consistency in persistent memory systems. In Proceedings of the 48th

Robustness Verification for Checking Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO-48, pages 672–
685, New York, NY, USA, December 2015. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[58] Peter Sewell, Susmit Sarkar, Scott Owens, Francesco Zappa Nardelli,
and Magnus O. Myreen. X86-TSO: A rigorous and usable programmer’s model for x86 multiprocessors. Communications of the ACM,
53(7):89–97, January 2010.
[59] Zhihang Sun, Hongyu Fan, and Fei He. Consistency-preserving propagation for SMT solving of concurrent program verification. Proceedings
of the ACM on Programming Languages, 6(OOPSLA2):158:929–158:956,
October 2022.
[60] Haris Volos, Sanketh Nalli, Sankarlingam Panneerselvam,
Venkatanathan Varadarajan, Prashant Saxena, and Michael M.
Swift. Aerie: Flexible file-system interfaces to storage-class memory.
In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer Systems,
EuroSys ’14, pages 1–14, New York, NY, USA, April 2014. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[61] Xiaojian Wu and A. L. Narasimha Reddy. SCMFS: A file system for
storage class memory. In Proceedings of 2011 International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC
’11, pages 1–11, New York, NY, USA, November 2011. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[62] Jian Xu and Steven Swanson. NOVA: A log-structured file system
for hybrid Volatile/Non-volatile main memories. In 14th USENIX

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 16), pages 323–338,
Santa Clara, CA, February 2016. USENIX Association.
[63] Jian Xu, Lu Zhang, Amirsaman Memaripour, Akshatha Gangadharaiah, Amit Borase, Tamires Brito Da Silva, Steven Swanson, and Andy
Rudoff. NOVA-Fortis: A Fault-Tolerant Non-Volatile Main Memory
File System. In Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, SOSP ’17, pages 478–496, New York, NY, USA, October 2017.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[64] Liangze Yin, Wei Dong, Wanwei Liu, Yunchou Li, and Ji Wang. YOGARCBMC: CBMC with Scheduling Constraint Based Abstraction Refinement. In Dirk Beyer and Marieke Huisman, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pages 422–426,
Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing.
[65] Liangze Yin, Wei Dong, Wanwei Liu, and Ji Wang. Scheduling constraint based abstraction refinement for weak memory models. In
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’18, pages 645–655, New York, NY,
USA, September 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[66] Liangze Yin, Wei Dong, Wanwei Liu, and Ji Wang. On Scheduling
Constraint Abstraction for Multi-Threaded Program Verification. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 46(5):549–565, May 2020.
[67] Bohong Zhu, Youmin Chen, Qing Wang, Youyou Lu, and Jiwu Shu.
Octopus+: An RDMA-Enabled Distributed Persistent Memory File
System. ACM Transactions on Storage, 17(3):19:1–19:25, August 2021.

