Robustness Verification for Checking Crash
Consistency of Non-volatile Memory
Zhilei Han

Fei He

School of Software
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
hzl21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

School of Software
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
hefei@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies provide competitive performance with DRAM and ensure data
persistence in the event of system failure. However, it exhibits weak behaviour in terms of the order in which stores
are committed to NVMs, and therefore requires extra efforts
from developers to flush pending writes. To ensure correctness of this error-prone task, it is crucial to develop a rigid
method to check crash consistency of programs running
on NVM devices. Most existing solutions are testing-based
and rely on user guidance to dynamically detect such deficiencies. In this paper, we present a fully automated method
to verify robustness, a newly established property for ensuring crash consistency of such programs. The method is
based on the observation that, reachability of a post-crash
non-volatile state under a given pre-crash execution can
be reduced to validity of the pre-crash execution with additional ordering constraints. Our robustness verification
algorithm employs a search-based framework to explore all
partial executions and states, and checks if any non-volatile
state is reachable under certain pre-crash execution. Once
a reachable non-volatile state is obtained, we further check
its reachability under memory consistency model. The algorithm is implemented in a prototype tool PMVerify that
leverages symbolic encoding of the program and utilizes an
SMT solver to efficiently explore all executions and states.
The method is integrated into the DPLL(T) framework to
optimize the robustness checking algorithm. Experiments
on the PMDK example benchmark show that PMVerify is
competitive with the state-of-the-art dynamic tool, PSan, in
terms of robustness violation detection.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Verification;
• Hardware → Memory and dense storage; • Computer
systems organization → Reliability.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 International License.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0698-1/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707269

Keywords: persistent memory, non-volatile memory, robustness, program verification, crash consistency
ACM Reference Format:
Zhilei Han and Fei He. 2025. Robustness Verification for Checking
Crash Consistency of Non-volatile Memory. In Proceedings of the
30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25),
March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707269

1

Introduction

Non-volatile memory (a.k.a. NVM, or persistent memory) is
a kind of non-conventional, byte-addressable storage device
that preserves its content after a power failure [35, 36]. It
enables direct access to persistent data using standard load
and store instructions, and thus avoids the overhead of OS
system calls. Due to its competitive performance with DRAM
and guarantee of data persistence, it has been widely used
in persistency-critical systems such as databases [4, 48, 51]
and file systems [8, 13, 33, 43, 60–63, 67].
However, modern processors have write-back caches that
induce non-determinism in the order stores are written to
memory. Since cache systems are volatile, it may lead to data
loss if some stores have not been committed to NVM when
a crash happens. The exact order in which stores are written back to NVM, referred to as persist order, is constrained
by the cache coherence protocol. Similar to memory consistency models which specify visibility order of memory
operations, in recent works the Intel-x86 [10, 37, 53–55] and
ARMv8 [10, 56] persistency models have been formalized
which prescribes the persist order. Both architectures exhibit
weak behaviours in terms of persist order.
As a simple example on Intel-x86, assume crash happens
after executing the two instructions a = 1; b = 1. Upon
recovery, it is possible to observe the non-volatile state a =
0; b = 1 (we assume 0 is the initial value of a). In general,
persist order might differ from the order memory operations
are made visible. Figure 1 shows a possible execution of these
two instructions and relevant orders. Here the store a = 1
is issued and becomes visible first per program order, but
remains in caches. On the contrary, the store b = 1 is issued
later but leaves the cache before the system fails. The store
a = 1 in the volatile cache is thus lost due to the crash.

