Proactive Runtime Detection of Aging-Related Silent
Data Corruptions: A Bottom-Up Approach
Jiacheng Ma

Majd Ganaiem

Madeline Burbage

University of Michigan
USA

Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology
Israel

University of Washington
USA

Theo Gregersen

Rachel McAmis

Freddy Gabbay

University of Washington
USA

University of Washington
USA

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Israel

Baris Kasikci
University of Washington and Google
USA

Abstract
Recent advancements in semiconductor process technologies have unveiled the susceptibility of hardware circuits to
reliability issues, especially those related to transistor aging. Transistor aging gradually degrades gate performance,
eventually causing hardware to behave incorrectly. Such
misbehaving hardware can result in silent data corruptions
(SDCs) in software—a type of failure that comes without logs
or exceptions, but causes miscomputing instructions, bitflips,
and broken cache coherency. Alas, while design efforts can
be made to mitigate transistor aging, complete elimination of
this problem during design and fabrication cannot be guaranteed. This emerging challenge calls for a mechanism that
not only detects potentially aged hardware in the field, but
also triggers software mitigations at application runtime.
We propose Vega, a novel workflow that allows efficient
detection of aging-related failures at software runtime. Vega
leverages the well-studied gate-level modeling of aging effects to identify susceptible signal propagation paths that
could fail due to transistor aging. It then utilizes formal verification techniques to generate short test cases that activate
these paths and detect any failure within them. Vega integrates the test cases into a user application by directly
fusing them together, or by packaging the test cases into
a library that the application can invoke. We demonstrate
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’24, April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0391-1/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622781.3674182

our proposed techniques on the arithmetic logic unit and
floating-point unit of a RISC-V CPU. We show that Vega
generates effective test cases and integrates them into applications with an average of 0.8% performance overhead.
ACM Reference Format:
Jiacheng Ma, Majd Ganaiem, Madeline Burbage, Theo Gregersen,
Rachel McAmis, Freddy Gabbay, and Baris Kasikci. 2024. Proactive
Runtime Detection of Aging-Related Silent Data Corruptions: A
Bottom-Up Approach. In 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 4 (ASPLOS ’24), April 27-May 1, 2024, La Jolla, CA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3622781.3674182

1

Introduction

In recent decades, the semiconductor industry has made remarkable technological progress. Continuous advancements
in process nodes have ensured a consistent downsizing of
transistors to nanoscale dimensions, yielding improvements
in performance and reductions in energy consumption. However, these advances have also heightened circuit reliability
challenges [9, 57], notably evidenced by the emergence of
silent data corruptions in data centers [23, 36–38, 52, 69, 75].
Silent data corruptions, or SDCs, are a form of undetected
failure that occurs without generating logs, exceptions, or
immediate program crashes. Instead, SDCs silently introduce
incorrect data into applications. As a result, an error can
spread far from its point of origin, potentially leading to
failures that are difficult to predict, prevent, and troubleshoot.
Recently, cloud providers have identified CPUs with such
SDCs in their data centers [37, 52, 75].
SDCs are risky, as they challenge the fundamental “failstop” assumption of hardware failures that software developers have been accustomed to for decades. Most software
applications in data centers and personal computers assume
that a circuit, having undergone correct design, fabrication,
and testing, will either function correctly or not work at all.

