and hardware. Therefore, the rapid adoption of domainspecific designs opens up new opportunities for performance
optimizations that prior work cannot easily exploit.
This paper identifies and exploits two inter-operator reuse
opportunities that domain-specific languages polish in sparse
dataflow graphs: consumer-producer reuse and cross-iteration
reuse, to reduce data movement, maximize data reuse, and
accelerate STA applications. In contrast, prior work exploits
solely intra-operator reuse due to the limitation of conventional
paradigms. We propose the OEI dataflow to capture interoperator reuse and the Sparsepipe architecture to support the
OEI dataflow with limited buffer space. The evaluation shows
Sparsepipe’s superior performance, energy, and area efficiency
over CPUs/GPUs and state-of-the-art accelerators.
Beyond our specific Sparsepipe implementation, the proposed OEI dataflow opens up other possibilities to improve STA
applications. For example, how to implement the OEI dataflow
on general-purpose hardware (e.g., GPGPU), and design the
extra hardware support to facilitate the buffer management
and synchronization across stages? How can we leverage the
modern compiler framework [4] for tensor applications to
automatically find applications with cross-iteration reuse and
accelerate them with the OEI dataflow? Can the same concept
of Sparsepipe apply to other application domains besides STA?
We leave these exciting new avenues to future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments. This work was sponsored by two
National Science Foundation (NSF) awards, CNS-2007124 and
CNS-2231877. This work was also supported by new faculty
start-up funds from University of California, Riverside.
R EFERENCES
[1] BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms). http://www.netlib.org/blas/,
2004.
[2] Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng
Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey
Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser,
Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dan Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens,
Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent
Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete
Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang
Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous
systems, 2015. Software available from tensorflow.org.
[3] Manoj Alwani, Han Chen, Michael Ferdman, and Peter Milder. Fusedlayer CNN Accelerators. In 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2016.
[4] Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh
Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni
Burovski, et al. Pytorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic
python bytecode transformation and graph compilation. In 29th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2024.
[5] Arvind and David E Culler. Dataflow architectures. Annual review of
computer science, pages 225–253, 1986.
[6] Arvind and Rishiyur S Nikhil. Executing a program on the mit taggedtoken dataflow architecture. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 39(3):300–
318, 1990.

