Polymorphic E

Evgeny Manzhosov and

Department of Computer Sc
New York, Ne
Email: {evgeny, simh

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new memory error
correction scheme, Polymorphic ECC, based on a novel idea of
redundancy polymorphism for error correction. With redundancy
polymorphism, we can use the check bits, i.e., parity bits in
traditional ECC, to correct errors from different fault models.
For example, the error correction procedure will use the same
redundancy value for single-bit errors, double-bit errors, ChipKill, and others. As a result, Polymorphic ECC corrects more
errors than traditional codes, which typically target a single fault
model or require multiple redundancies for multi-fault model
support, leading to higher storage overheads. Our construction
is very compact, allowing us to embed an inlined cryptographic
message authentication code (MAC) with each cacheline, ensuring
data integrity and near 100% error detection without needing
any extra storage. The MAC, further permits iterative correction
among the many supported fault models. In the paper, we show
that the novel combination of redundancy polymorphism with
iterative correction, corrects errors due to fault models not
covered by traditional codes and guarantees data integrity with
up to 60-bit MACs while using 64-byte cachelines and standard
40-bit DDR5 memory channels.
Index Terms—Memory Error Correction, Security, Reliability,
Polymorphism.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Today, Error Correction Codes (ECC) are critical for offering acceptable levels of system reliability. Their effectiveness,
however, is increasingly challenged by emerging security
threats [14] and modern defense mechanisms [74]. Specifically, rowhammer faults [64], [71] and extremely tight design
margins exacerbate the reliability concerns of modern memory
systems. At the same time, new security defenses, such as
memory encryption [4], [11], [40], further strain program
reliability since faults that escape traditional ECC mechanisms
result in errors that diffuse and propagate more widely. Thus,
in this paper, we present a novel ECC mechanism designed
to address the dual challenges of ensuring both the reliability
and security of modern memory systems.
We describe a novel error correction scheme, Polymorphic
ECC, which significantly enhances error detection and correction capabilities compared to current state-of-the-art codes
while staying within the bits budgeted to support traditional
ECC. Because of how it is constructed, Polymorphic ECC
permits at least a 40-bit MAC to be stored with each 64byte cache line to detect any pattern of bit corrections with
a probability of 1 − 2−40 with no additional area overhead.
Further, Polymorphic ECC also permits storing 11 redundancy
bits per 64 data bits, allowing it to correct any single-bit
error, two random bit errors, eight-bit errors within naturally

