1

Input description file
✓ Model description
✓ System configuration
✓ Parallelization strategy
✓ Network topology

2

GPU

4
5
Operator-granularity execution graph

Task-granularity execution graph

Necessary operators

Operator

3
CUPTI

Necessary operators

Task

Forward MHA

ampere_fp16_..._32x1_nn, …

Backward MHA

ampere_fp16_..._64x3_nt, …

Profiling module

Simulation
algorithm

Singleiteration
training
time

Operator-to-task lookup table

Fig. 4: Key components of vTrain and its simulation flow.

III. V T RAIN : A P ROFILING - BASED S OFTWARE
F RAMEWORK FOR S IMULATING LLM T RAINING T IME

Bucket 1

Layer 1

Layer 2

Bucket 2

Bwd 4

Bwd 3

Bwd 2

Bwd 1

All-Reduce

A. Simulation Framework Overview
Figure 4 provides a high-level overview of vTrain’s simulation flow. An input description file is provided to the simulator
which contains the target LLM to evaluate, total number of
GPUs available, the training system configuration (e.g., number of GPUs within a node, intra-/inter-node communication
bandwidth, . . .), and the LLM parallelization strategy (e.g.,
(t, d, p)-way 3D parallelism) to explore ( 1 ). vTrain then
constructs a high-level operator-granularity execution graph
which represents what are the computation and communication operators to execute, as defined by the LLM model
architecture and the parallelization strategy employed ( 2 ).
Using the high-level operator-granularity execution graph,
vTrain utilizes the profiling module to determine what are the
low-level CUDA kernels (tasks) to execute for each of the
operators in the operator-granularity execution graph and also
measures the wall clock time latency incurred in executing that
CUDA kernel, constructing a operator-to-task lookup table
( 3 ). Using this lookup table, vTrain translates the high-level
operator-granularity execution graph into a low-level taskgranularity execution graph ( 4 ) encapsulating which CUDA
kernels should be executed for a given operator-granularity
execution graph vertex. Finally, vTrain simulates the singleiteration training time by referring to the task-granularity
execution graph and the operator-to-task lookup table ( 5 ).
B. (High-level) Operator-granularity Execution Graph
The operator-granularity execution graph is designed to
represent which operations need to be executed for an LLM
and in what order. A graph vertex within the operatorgranularity graph (referred to as a layer-node) represents the
operator to execute for that layer-node and the graph edges
that connect layer-nodes determine the dependencies between
them, i.e., the execution order. The purpose of constructing
the operator-granularity graph is to determine not only the
computation operators (e.g., forward/backward pass of a MHA
or FFN layer) but more importantly the communication operators (e.g., All-Reduce, Send-Receive) to execute, which
is determined by the 3D parallelism strategy employed. As
discussed in Section II-B, each parallelism strategy introduces
a different communication pattern. To accurately simulate an
LLM training iteration, vTrain needs to determine (1) the
type of communication operators to launch, (2) when those

Layer 3

Layer 4

WU
All-Reduce

(a) With gradient bucketing
Bwd 4

Bwd 3

Bwd 2

: Sequential dependency

Bwd 1

WU
All-Reduce

(b) Without gradient bucketing

Fig. 5: Inserting All-Reduce operators for data parallel training
when gradient bucketing is (a) enabled and (b) disabled. “Bwd i”
represents the ith layer’s backward pass and “WU” refers to the weight
update pass. Example in (a) assumes that layer (1&2) and (3&4) are
grouped into a bucket.

communication operators should be executed, and (3) what are
the inter-operator dependencies enforced by the insertion of
such communication operators. Below we discuss how vTrain
augments the operator-granularity graph with the required
communication operators per each parallelism type.
Data parallelism. In data parallel training, an All-Reduce
operation is performed targeting the weight gradients. Stateof-the-art ML frameworks like PyTorch DDP [28] provides an
optimization called gradient bucketing which helps overlap the
All-Reduce communication latency with the computation time
of LLM backward pass. When gradient bucketing is enabled,
the weight gradients are separated into several buckets and
the software runtime kicks off the All-Reduce communication
operator for a gradient bucket whenever any given bucket is
ready for an All-Reduce. Such optimization helps the AllReduce latency for a target gradient bucket to be hidden
inside the other gradient buckets’ derivation during backward
pass. vTrain properly models such optimization by assigning
the proper number of gradient buckets as defined in the
LLM model description file, identical to how PyTorch DDP
does it. Using such information, an All-Reduce operator for
each bucket is properly inserted into the operator-granularity
execution graph, as depicted in Figure 5(a). When gradient
bucketing is disabled, All-Reduce is required only once at the
end of the backward pass and vTrain properly models such
behavior as illustrated in Figure 5(b).
Tensor parallelism. As described in Section II-B, tensor
parallelism alternately splits an LLM decoder layer’s weight
matrices along the column and row dimension, invoking
an All-Reduce operation for every two consecutive matrix
multiplication operations of MHA and FFN blocks. vTrain
models such communication operation by inserting an All-

