Algorithm 1 Estimating an LLM’s single-iteration training time using
task-granularity execution graph
Input: Task-granularity execution graph G = {i : (Vi , Ei ) | Vi and Ei are
vertices and edges associated to GPU i, respectively }
Output: Iteration time titer
1: Initialize timeline T
2: Initialize task queue Q ← ∅
3:
4: for all i, (Vi , Ei ) ∈ G do
5:
T [i] ← 0
6:
Q ← Q ∪ {u|u ∈ Vi , u.ref = 0}
7: end for
8:
9: while Q ̸= ∅ do
10:
u ← Q.pop()
▷ Fetch a task in FIFO order
11:
i ← u.device
12:
T [i] ← max (T [i], u.start + u.duration) ▷ Proceed the timeline
13:
for all c ∈ u.child do
14:
c.start ← max (c.start, u.start + u.duration)
15:
c.ref ← c.ref − 1
▷ Update the child task
16:
if c.ref = 0 then
17:
Q ← Q ∪ {c}
▷ Update the task queue
18:
end if
19:
end for
20: end while
21:
22: titer ← max (T [i])

granularity graph into a low-level task-level execution graph
for accurate training time estimations. This is done by replacing each computation operators with a sequence of associated
CUDA kernels (which is listed precisely in the operator-to-task
lookup table) while honoring inter-operator dependencies.
While these steps successfully transforms the computation
operators into its corresponding CUDA kernels, vTrain still
requires means to estimate the time taken to execute communication operators. vTrain employs a profiling-based approach
for modeling intra-node communication where we measure the
communication latency incurred across different communication data sizes and communication bandwidth over real multiGPU systems. Specifically, we use NVIDIA’s state-of-the-art
NCCL library [42] to profile key communication primitives
involved in 3D parallelism training (e.g., All-Reduce) over
various data sizes and the number of GPUs involved in
communication, which we utilize for estimating the latency of
intra-node communication operators. For modeling inter-node
communications over multi-node distributed training systems,
vTrain employs a latency-bandwidth model which utilizes the
analytical model suggested by NVIDIA’s NCCL to estimate
All-Reduce communication latency of multi-node collective
communication (detailed in Section IV, Equation 1).
E. Simulation Algorithm for Estimating Training Time
With the low-level task-granularity execution graph in place,
vTrain now has means to estimate an LLM’s single-iteration
training time. Algorithm 1 provides a pseudo-code of how
vTrain utilizes the task-level execution graph for estimating
single-iteration training time. The simulation begins by initializing the timeline and the task queue. The timeline maintains
the time advanced for each GPU within the training system.
Before the simulation begins, our simulator first searches all

tasks in the task-granularity graph that have no dependencies, and places those tasks into the task queue (line 4-7).
Afterwards, vTrain begins the simulation process to estimate
training time, which goes through the following procedure:
fetch a task from the task queue in FIFO order (line 10), then
advance the corresponding timeline accordingly (line 12). It is
worth emphasizing that GPU kernel executions in LLM training are inherently sequential with few GPU kernels executed
in parallel, due to the high computational intensity of these
tasks. Despite such property, our simulation must account
for the possibility of computation-communication overlap, as
illustrated in Figure 5, which we faithfully model during the
process in line 12. Following this, the states of the child
tasks are updated (line 14-15), and newly executable tasks
are pushed into the task queue (line 16-18). The simulation is
finished when there is no more tasks to execute at which point
vTrain returns the predicted single-iteration training time.
The total end-to-end wall clock training time to consume all
training tokens is estimated by multiplying “predicted singleiteration training time” with “the total number of training
iterations an LLM training needs to go through (i.e., total
number of tokens / tokens consumed per iteration)”.
F. Profiling Cost and Simulation Speed
Profiling a target LLM model configuration with hyperparameters (h, L, s, n) incurs O(1) latency because we only need
to profile the necessary operators (Section III-C). This amounts
to a simulation time of a single LLM training to be in the
range of several seconds (e.g., 2 seconds when evaluated over
AMD EPYC 7502 32-Core CPU). Consequently, conducting
design space exploration to identify the optimal 3D parallelism
strategy, which requires the evaluation of several thousands
of different 3D parallelism’s training time, takes only tens of
minutes over a single CPU server as each simulation points are
completely parallelizable over multiple CPU cores. Overall,
vTrain provides AI practitioners a highly productive toolset to
develop efficient and cost-effective LLM training plans.
IV. S IMULATION AND VALIDATION M ETHODOLOGY
We implemented vTrain on top of PyTorch 2.0.1 [56]. The
profiling module is implemented using CUPTI provided by
NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit 11.8 [47] which is integrated into
PyTorch as a C++ extension for Python. To model LLM
training, we leverage the code base of Microsoft’s MegatronDeepSpeed [35] which fully supports 3D parallelism for training transformer-based LLMs. For validating vTrain’s accuracy
in predicting LLM’s single-iteration training time, we separate
our validation study into two parts, focusing on predicting the
single-iteration training time over 1) a single-node containing
8 GPUs and 2) multi-nodes containing 512 GPUs (all based
on an NVIDIA A100 GPU). Below we discuss the details of
our vTrain validation methodology.
Single-node training time validation. For intra-node
single-iteration training time validation, we perform the actual
training of LLMs using a single AWS EC2 p4d GPU instance which contains 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs connected over

