Predicted
iteration time (s)

Predicted
iteration time (s)

1.8
1.2
0.6
R² = 0.9896

0
0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

Measured iteration time (s)

(a) Single-node validation

1.8

80
60
40
20

R² = 0.9887

0
0

20

40

60

80

Measured iteration time (s)

(b) Multi-node validation

Fig. 9: Comparison of measured vs. estimated single-iteration LLM
training time in (a) single-node training and (b) multi-node training.
All training experiments are done using half (FP16) precision.

NVLink/NVSwitch [44]. We collected 1,440 data points with
various LLM model configurations and tensor/data/pipeline
parallelization plans. NVIDIA’s NCCL [42] is used to profile
and model key communication primitives of LLM training
whose communication data size ranges from 1 MB to 1024
MB. The measured single-iteration training times of these data
points over the 8 GPU system are compared against the vTrain
predicted training time, showing a mean absolute percentage
error (MAPE) of 8.37% with a coefficient of determination of
0.9896 (Figure 9(a)). One of the primary causes of vTrain’s
single-node simulation error is rooted in how intra-node
communication is modeled in our simulator. To model intranode communication, vTrain profiles All-Reduce latencies
while running NCCL primitives in an isolated environment.
However, we observed that the latency of NCCL primitives
during actual training is on average 30% higher than those
measured in an isolated setting, a phenomenon also reported
in [81]. Such discrepancy was especially more pronounced
when tensor parallelism is employed. Specifically, vTrain underestimates the latencies of forward and backward passes of
a tensor-parallel transformer layer because tensor parallelism
exhibits more frequent All-Reduce operations (twice for each
forward and backward passes of a transformer layer) than
other parallelism strategies. Further improving vTrain to better
accommodate such behavior for intra-node communication is
left as future work.
Multi-node training time validation. Similar to singlenode validation, we perform the actual training of various LLM model configurations and measure their singleiteration training times for our multi-node training validation.
Our multi-node GPU system contains 64 multi-GPU server
nodes where each node contains 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs,
amounting to 512 GPUs. Intra-node communication is done
over NVLink/NVSwitch while inter-node communication is
conducted over four 200 Gbps Mellanox HDR InfiniBand
HCAs. The server nodes are connected in a two-level nonblocking fat-tree topology. Due to the enormous monetary cost
associated with LLM training at this scale, collecting sufficient
amount of validation data for academic research in itself is an
extremely challenging task – to the best of our knowledge,
the only publicly available real-world measurements of largescale LLM training (wall clock) time is reported in MicrosoftNVIDIA’s work on Megatron-Turing NLG [67] which only
includes “3” LLM training data points. With the help of our
collaborators in industry, we were able to secure 116 data
points for validating the aforementioned multi-node training

time (i.e., total of 512 A100 GPUs), which we compared
against the vTrain-predicted training time. The validation data
points were collected based on the LLM model configurations
of Megatron-LM [40]. As discussed in Section III-D, we
use a simple latency-bandwidth model to estimate inter-node
communication time. Specifically, we calculate the communication latency of each All-Reduce operation (the most critical
collective communication primitive in 3D parallel training,
Figure 5) using the following analytical model based formula
suggested in NVIDIA’s NCCL [45]:
t=

S 2(n − 1)
·
B
n

(1)

Here t is the derived communication time, S is the size
of data being transferred, n is the number of workers (i.e.,
GPUs) participating in the collective communication, and B
is the effective communication bandwidth. To better model
the effective communication bandwidth, we introduce a tuning
parameter called bandwidth effectiveness factor, denoted as
α, and express the effective communication bandwidth as
B = αBmax where Bmax is the maximum interconnection
bandwidth, i.e., 800 Gbps (= 200 Gbps × 4). To identify the
optimal α value, we sweep this value from 0.1 to 1.0 and
compare the vTrain-predicted single-iteration training times
vs. the measured single-iteration training time. We observed
that the average prediction error was minimized at α = 1.0
in our evaluation setting, which assumes that all the internode network bandwidth can fully be utilized. Using an α
value of 1.0, our multi-node training validation study showed a
MAPE of 14.73% with a coefficient of determination of 0.9887
(Figure 9(b)). The primary causes of vTrain’s multi-node
simulation error are rooted on our simple latency-bandwidth
model utilized for estimating inter-node communication latency, which introduces two main avenues of improvement.
First, our inter-node communication model does not capture
the effect of straggler GPU node’s training time at synchronization points, nor does it account for the latency overheads
of NCCL kernel launches. Second, it is challenging for the
latency-bandwidth communication model to accommodate the
dynamic behaviors of a large, complicated network topology.
For example, in Figure 3, there are four different data parallel
groups across Node 0 and Node 3. Each group performs
All-Reduce communications, and these communications from
the four groups (depicted as gray arrows) share the same
network building blocks (e.g., ToR switches), which can lead
to potential interference between the groups. However, our
analytical model is not able to capture such dynamic effects
as it only accepts statically determined data size, number of
GPUs involved in the inter-node communication, and link
bandwidth as inputs. We believe the simulation errors of
vTrain’s multi-node training time can be alleviated by incorporating the dynamic nature of inter-node communication into
our analytical model or by employing existing sophisticated
modeling techniques [23], [75]. We leave the augmentation of
such advanced communication model as future work.

