      Veiled Pathways: Investi
              Channels within
          Yuanqing Miao                      Yingtian Zhang
       Penn State University              Penn State University
     University Park, PA, USA           University Park, PA, USA
        ypm5112@psu.edu                     yjz5396@psu.edu

        Gang Tan                                     Rui Zhang
  Penn State University                        Penn State Universi
University Park, PA, USA                     University Park, PA, U
      gtan@psu.edu                               rmz5227@psu.edu



   Abstract—With the emergence of GPUs as first-class compute
engines, more concentrated focus has been put into covert and
side channel discovery in these architectures. However, most of
the covert and side channels uncovered on GPUs to date are
rooted in “GPU cores”, which include computational cores, cache
and core interconnects, but they do not consider “GPU uncore”,
which include non-computational engines, GPU DRAM, host-
GPU links and inter-GPU links.
   In this paper, we delve into the less-explored domains of
GPU uncore, unveiling four novel leakage sources for covert and
side channel exploitation: (1) GPU DRAM frequency scaling;
(2) NVENC utilization; (3) NVDEC utilization; (4) NVJPEG
utilization. What makes these covert and side channels interesting
is that they all take effect under the GPU MPS mode –
which fractionalizes GPU cores and GPU memory on both
desktop-scale and server-scale GPUs. Furthermore, our study
reevaluates PCI-e bandwidth allocation on GPUs. Notably, we
have engineered covert and side channel capable of bypassing
GPU MIG isolation – a mechanism implemented by NVIDIA to
physically segregate hardware resources on server-scale GPUs.
Our research showcases concrete examples of these covert and
side channels, highlighting their potency in breaching system
security, all achieved without necessitating root privileges. This
underscores the practical implications and urgency of addressing
these vulnerabilities in GPU architectures.
   Index Terms—Side channel leakage, GPU, MPS, MIG, video
encoder, video decoder

                       I. I NTRODUCTION
   As a Single-Instruction-Multiple-Threads (SIMT) processor
optimized for throughput-sensitive tasks, GPUs have already
demonstrated performance superiority across numerous
application domains. In fact, from small mobile devices to
large data centers, GPUs have proven to be both essential and
irreplaceable. Originally designed for graphics processing, the
parallel architecture of a GPU enables it to simultaneously
process millions of pixels, resulting in vivid and life-like visual
experiences. GPUs have also emerged as the backbone of
modern machine learning (ML) ecosystems, particularly with
the rapid expansion of ML models, algorithms, and datasets.
In particular, deep learning algorithms rely heavily on the
massive parallel processing capabilities of GPUs to train large



                                                                      1
