Motivation
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

3

Cha2000
nnel 3000 4000

0

(a) Layer10_Attn_K_proj

0

2000
1500
1000
500

1000

Cha2000
nnel 3000 4000

0

(b) Layer29_Attn_O_proj

Figure 3. Activation distributions in LLaMA-7B. Outliers
are present in certain channels of activations, leading to the
ineffectiveness of conventional quantization strategies.
strategies on activation tensors, these outliers can cause typical hidden state values to be quantized to zero, resulting in
significant accuracy degradation. These outliers are so crucial to the representational capacity of LLMs that discarding
them is not feasible [12].
Fortunately, we have conducted extensive experimental
analysis on current typical LLMs, such as LLaMA, and found
that these outliers typically distribute within specific feature
dimensions. As illustrated in Figure 3, the outliers in LLaMA7B only exist in certain activation channels. Therefore, an
intuitive approach is to separately quantize outliers and normal values, quantizing the outliers with high precision and
the normal values with low precision.
3.2

The FMPQ Algorithm

With the above observation, we can apply a fine-grained
mixed-precision quantization algorithm that partitions the
normal values and outliers into different parts, and quantizes them with different precision. For example, we quantize
normal values to 4-bit, while outliers to 8-bit. However, as
demonstrated in Figure 4b, previous channel-wise quantization algorithms [41, 48] cannot ensure the efficiency of the
quantized model due to their misalignment with hardware
computation granularity.
In fact, the minimum computation granularity on modern
GPUs is fixed. For instance, the FP16 tensor core on A100 has
a minimum computation granularity of 64×64×32 (𝑚×𝑛×𝑘).
This hardware constraint necessitates that the granularity
of quantization is an integer multiple of the minimum computation granularity, to maximize the utilization of tensor
core. Consequently, prior channel-wise or irregular cluster
quantization strategies [41, 42], which fail to align well with
hardware computation granularity, are inefficient. On the
other hand, overly fine-grained quantization strategies (e.g.,
tile-wise quantization) introduce significant software scheduling overhead. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 4c, we
adopt a block-wise mixed-precision quantization method,
which partitions the activation tensor only along the channel

FMPQ: Fine-Grained Mixed-Precision
Quantization

To address the challenges of activation quantization in posttraining quantization, this section first analyzes the characteristics of activation distributions in LLMs and then proposes a mixed-precision quantization algorithm to achieve
low-bit quantization of LLM activations. The proposed FMPQ
effectively reduces the computational and storage costs of
LLM inference, serving as the foundational enabler of our
COMET inference framework.
3.1

1000

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Tok
en

0

2000
1500
1000
500

n

Existing LLM serving systems [27, 31] typically utilize modern GPUs, which are equipped with high-bandwidth memory (HBM) and powerful processing units such as highthroughput tensor cores. For instance, the A100 80G offers
80GB of HBM with 2.0TB/s bandwidth and can deliver up to
312 TFLOPS of FP16 tensor core performance for GEMM operations. In addition, modern GPUs support lower-precision
computations, achieving 624 TOPS with INT8 tensor cores
and 1248 TOPS with INT4 tensor cores. Modern GPUs also
include CUDA cores for handling complex computations
such as data conversion and permutation.
As depicted in Figure 2, we employ the classic roofline
model to evaluate the performance of LLM inference on
GPUs. According to Figure 1, we assess the performance of
two types of operators, activation-activation operators and
weight-activation operators, under different precisions. The
computation intensity of the activation-activation operator is
fixed at 1.0, making it memory-bandwidth bound. Therefore,
implementing low-bit quantization for the KV cache can significantly enhance the throughput of activation-activation
operators. Conversely, the computation intensity of weightactivation operators varies with batch size and inference
phases. Thus, under large-batch parallelism, adopting lowprecision activation quantization can further improve inference throughput. These observations motivate us to explore
low-precision quantization for activations (including input
activations and the KV cache) more thoroughly. Additionally,
due to being bound by different characteristics, we will adopt
different quantization strategies for input activation and KV
cache, as detailed in Section 3.2.

Tok
e

2.3

Analysis of Activation Distribution

Unlike small-scale neural networks [8, 20, 38], a distinctive
characteristic of LLMs is the pervasive presence of outliers.
Once a model exceeds a certain scale (in practice, around 6
billion parameters), a small cluster of hidden state features
(usually less than 1%) exhibits magnitudes significantly larger
than the rest [7]. These emergent large-magnitude features
are referred to as outliers, and they have magnitudes that
can exceed typical hidden state values by tenfold or even a
hundredfold. When using traditional min-max quantization
4

