llama.cpp [11]. To further simplify usage, we use pybind to
bind these interfaces to Python. This allows programmers
to quickly and easily integrate our kernel into Python-based
frameworks, such as Pytorch and Huggingface [14].
In our implementation, the tile size presented in Figure 5a
is set as 128 × 128 × 128 (𝑚 × 𝑛 × 𝑘) for most cases. Furthermore, we set the warp shape as 64 × 64 × 128 for INT4 tensor
core, while 64 × 64 × 64 for INT8 tensor core. As a result, the
number of warps issued by one W4A4 tile is only half of the
W4A8 tile. These configurations are selected based on extensive preliminary evaluation and are intended to optimize the
computational throughput while balancing memory access
patterns and processing power. By maintaining these fixed
configurations across all our experiments, we aim to clearly
demonstrate the performance improvement from detailed
kernel optimization. The fixed configuration allows us to isolate the effects of other variables and focus on analyzing the
impact of different optimization strategies and algorithmic
adjustments. The chosen shapes reflect the typical dimensions used in high-performance computing scenarios and are
well-suited to the architecture of modern GPUs, facilitating
efficient parallel processing and minimizing latency.

6

Evaluation

6.1

Experimental Setup

models on language modeling and zero-shot tasks. Specifically, we evaluated the perplexity of quantized models on
WikiText2 [22], and evaluated the zero-shot accuracy on
PIQA [3], ARC [6] (including ARC-e and ARC-c), HellaSwag [44]
and WinoGrande [32] with lm_eval [10].
Algorithm Baselines. We compared FMPQ with widely
used PTQ LLM quantization algorithms, including weightonly and weight-activation quantization methods. We use
SmoothQuant [40] as the basic weight-activation quantization method, and also compare with weight-only quantization algorithms including GPTQ [9], AWQ [18] and Omniquant [33]. Furthermore, we aggressively extend Omniquant
to W4A4 and assess the corresponding accuracy degradation.
Furthermore, we compare FMPQ with a recently released
W4A8 KV4 quantization algorithm, QoQ [19], which includes
a group-wise quantization strategy (i.e., the group size is 128
and each group has one FP16 scale factor).
Perplexity Evaluation. Table 1 presents the evaluation
results of Wikitext2 perplexity between FMPQ and other
algorithm baselines. As one can notice, compared to W8A8
SmoothQuant and W4A16 Omniquant, FMPQ only introduces a slight perplexity increase (only 0.10 for LLaMA-17B). When we further introduce KV cache quantization, the
increased perplexity is as small as 0.05 on average, which
is negligible. According to our evaluation, only 16% of the
whole activations are quantized to 8-bit, on average. For
LLaMA-30B, only 8% of the total activations are quantized to
8-bit. Obviously, FMPQ provides a practical path for mixedprecision LLM serving. In comparison, when adopting a fully
W4A4 Omniquant, the increased perplexity is unbearable
(perplexity increase more than 5.21), hindering the practical
deployment of quantized LLMs.
Zero-shot Accuracy. We further report the zero-shot
accuracy of five common sense tasks in Table 2. Compared
with the state-of-the-art W4A16 quantization method, the
accuracy acquired by FMPQ is only decreased by 0.75%. For
LLaMA-3-8B, our FMPQ strategy even outperforms Omniquant when evaluating HellaSwag, demonstrating its efficiency. For LLaMA-3-8B, our fine-grained mixed-precision
quantization strategy even outperforms the existing W4A8
KV4 quantization method, QoQ, demonstrating its efficiency.
In summary, the FMPQ algorithm offers a viable path toward
practical high-performance LLM serving.

Algorithm. The proposed quantization algorithm, FMPQ,
is implemented using HuggingFace on top of PyTorch. We
employ block-wise mixed-precision (INT4 and INT8) quantization for activations and channel-wise asymmetric INT4
group quantization for the KV cache. Additionally, we adopt
the algorithm in [33] to achieve 4-bit weight quantization.
We use the term "W4AxKV4" to denote the configurations
we adopt. Note that most of the computations are conducted
on W4A4KV4 cases.
System. We evaluate the performance of the COMET
inference system at two different levels: kernel-level benchmarking and end-to-end inference performance. All performance evaluations are conducted on the NVIDIA A10080GB-SXM4 platform with CUDA 12.1. Our primary focus
is on the performance of linear layers within LLMs during the token generation phase. GPU kernel performance
is measured using NVIDIA Nsight Compute [24]. End-toend inference throughput is measured using NVIDIA Nsight
Systems [25]. For baseline systems, we use TensorRT-LLM
(TRT-LLM) v0.10.0 to perform inference evaluations under
different configurations.
6.2

6.3

Kernel Performance

We evaluate the COMET-W4Ax kernel on various GEMM
workloads within LLaMA families, Mistral-7B, Qwen2-72B
and OPT-175B. We set three different batch sizes (16, 64
and 256) to validate the adaptability of different kernels.
These various batch size configurations encompass a wide
range of use cases, spanning from terminal devices to cloud
data centers. During our kernel performance evaluation, the
W4A4 ratio is set to 75%. Note that in actual model inference,
we often achieve a higher W4A4 ratio. The baselines we

Algorithm Evaluation

Algorithm Benchmarks. We compare our proposed FMPQ
algorithm with other baselines on the LLaMA-1 [35], LLaMA2 [36] and LLaMA-3 family models. Following previous literature settings [2, 5, 9, 21, 33], we evaluated FMPQ-quantized
9

