POD-Attention: Unlocking Full Prefill-Decode Overlap for Faster LLM Inference

80

context length = 4K
8

16

32

60
40
20
0 64) (64, 128) (32, 64) (16, 32)
(128,

Tile Dimension (Q, K/V)

(a) Compute utilization.

100

HBM BW Utilization (%)

Compute Utilization (%)

100

context length = 4K

80
60
40
20

8

16

32

0 64) (64, 128) (32, 64) (16, 32)
(128,

Tile Dimension (Q, K/V)

(b) DRAM BW utilization.

Figure 10. Impact of decode tile size on compute and HBM
BW utilization for batch sizes 8, 16 and 32.

various optimizations to maximize the benefit of fusing prefill
and decode attention computation.
4.2.1 Tile Sizes. Data tiling is necessary to make effective
use of tensor cores, which provide ∼8× higher throughput
than their CUDA core counterpart [26]. Tiling also helps improve shared memory usage. However, the benefit of tiling
is not uniform across operations. Decode operates on a single token per request, having a tile length of one across the
query sequence length (QSL) dimension. In Group Query Attention [25], this length increases to the ratio between query
and KV heads, typically 2 – 8. Due to this small dimension
length, data reuse is insignificant, and performance is limited
by memory bandwidth.
FlashAttention uses tile lengths of 64 – 128 for the QSL
dimension. The side-effect of using such large tile sizes is
that decodes end up zero padded, causing redundant compute [34]. For example, Figure 10a shows that compute utilization of the decode attention kernel is proportional to
tile sizes, reaching up to 70% at QSL tile dimension of 128,
compared to 10% with tile dimension of 16. However, note
that decode attention is memory bound and hence, the primary objective of a decode kernel is to try and saturate
memory bandwidth. Figure 10b shows that even at a relatively large QSL tile dimension of 64, the decode kernel is
able to maximize memory bandwidth utilization. Hence, for
a decode-only attention kernel, there is little incentive to
reducing tile sizes further.
In contrast, using large tile sizes for decodes is counterproductive in a fused kernel: any redundant compute performed by decodes interferes with co-located prefills since
tensor cores are shared between them. If we reduce unnecessary computation, prefill can make better use of the tensor
cores. To do so, we use a decode tile length of 16 for QSL,
the minimum needed by CUTLASS [11] for A100 tensor operations. This drops the compute utilization of decodes to
∼10%, freeing up tensor cores for prefill. Figure 10b shows
that reducing tile size has no adverse impact on decode performance at large batch sizes.

ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands

4.2.2 Concurrent CTAs per SM. The number of CTAs
running concurrently on an SM dictates the amount of resources (e.g., shared memory) each CTA can have. More
CTAs per SM implies less resources per CTA, but more opportunities for fine-grained scheduling and co-location, i.e.,
with 2 CTAs per SM we can only co-locate prefills and decodes in a 1:1 ratio, but with 4 CTAs per SM, we can allocate
CTAs to prefill and decode in different proportion depending
on batch composition e.g., 3 CTAs to prefill and 1 CTA to decode. In general, prefills benefit from fewer CTAs per SM as
it allows each CTA access to more shared memory, enabling
use of larger tile sizes. In contrast, decodes do not benefit
from larger tile sizes and therefore using more CTAs per SM
can be beneficial since it allows fine-grained scheduling.
To achieve the best of both worlds, POD-Attention supports two configurations: 2 CTAs per SM for prefill-dominant
hybrid batches and 4 CTAs per SM otherwise. Based on the
desired configuration, we modify the tile lengths and number
of threads used for prefill and decode. We also explored if 8
CTAs per SM can further improve performance and found
that it only marginally improves performance in a few cases
while under-performing in most cases. POD-Attention automatically picks the most suitable configuration at runtime.
4.2.3 Virtual Decode CTAs. The amount of shared memory provided to each prefill and decode CTA must be same in
the fused kernel. However, because decode uses smaller tile
sizes, the shared memory requirement of decode is a quarter
of the prefill requirement. To avoid over-allocating shared
memory to decodes, we divide each decode CTA into virtual
CTAs containing a warp of threads. If the original decode
CTA has four warps, each virtual CTA contains one warp
which uses a quarter of the shared memory of the original
CTA. The sum of shared memory used by all the virtual
CTAs in each regular CTA is close to the shared memory
used by prefill. This way, virtual decode CTAs balance the
shared memory used by prefill and decode.
4.2.4 Limiting Prefill Splits. FlashAttention parallelizes
computation across the query heads and QSL tile dimension.
FlashDecoding [31], designed for decode which has a QSL
of one, further splits the computation across the K/V dimension when there is not enough parallelism to fill the SMs of
the GPU. The side-effect of this approach is that different
CTAs fetch the same query tensor from memory independently of each other, proportional to the number of splits.
Consequently, splitting the computation increases memory
bandwidth utilization. While splitting along the key/value dimension is not required for prefills when the input contains
enough tokens, chunked-prefills limit the number of tokens
processed per-iteration by design (to minimize TBT). Therefore, FlashAttention also uses the FlashDecoding technique
to accelerate the chunked-prefill attention computation. This
scheme works well for a prefill-only kernel as increased parallelism can easily offset the cost of extra memory reads.

