TAPAS: Thermal- and Power-Aware Scheduling for LLM Inference in Cloud Platforms

TAPAS then prevents routing requests to VMs that could
trigger an airflow violation.
Row. Similarly to aisles, TAPAS estimates the load for all
servers in a row and aggregates these into a total power
value. It then assesses whether routing requests to VMs in
that row would risk exceeding the peak power limit.
Server. TAPAS tracks the current load and, using Equation (2), estimates whether the GPU temperature for each
server will exceed the threshold. It avoids routing requests
to VMs on servers with a high risk of overheating.
4.3

(4) the server fan airflow, and (5) the power-load for the
servers. In addition, when the provider onboards a new LLM,
TAPAS profiles the impact of each configuration parameter
in that hardware, following the process described in Section 3. During regular datacenter operation, TAPAS refines
these models on a weekly basis. During this weekly update,
TAPAS collects power and load patterns for each server and
row to predict their utilization. We use a template-based
approach that leverages data from the previous week [68].
We make these models and profiles available to the other
three main components through regular data updates.

Instance configuration

VM Allocator. We implement our workload placement policies in a rule-based VM Allocator, inspired by Protean [21],
using three main rules: (1) a validator rule filters aisles and
rows based on peak airflow and power; (2) a preference rule
directs IaaS workloads to cooler servers and SaaS workloads
to warmer servers. For this rule, we categorize servers into
three equally sized groups: cold, medium, and warm; and (3)
another preference rule guides VM placement based on the
IaaS/SaaS balance, grouping servers into three categories:
IaaS-heavy, SaaS-heavy, and balanced. These rules use current cluster data and the weekly updated models and profiles.
Finally, our VM Allocator applies these rules to select the
final server to host the GPU VM.

To ensure servers remain within cooling and power limits during load spikes or emergency events, TAPAS calculates the maximum allowable airflow, GPU temperature, and
server power for each instance. Based on these limits, the
Instance Configurator uses the thermal and power profiles
of the LLM from Figure 16 to determine the optimal GPU
frequency, batch size, model parallelism, quantization, and
model size that maximize goodput without quality impact.
We also account for the time required to reassign these
settings and prevent requests from being sent to instances
during transitions [69]. For example, changing the model
parallelism, size, or quantization level requires reloading the
model, which can take a few seconds. Given these overheads
and the goal of maximizing quality, adjustments to model
quantization and size are typically the last resort.
4.4

Load Balancer. We deploy the SaaS endpoints on a dedicated set of VMs that expose an HTTP REST interface. These
VMs implement the Load Balancer, which forwards LLM inference requests to the appropriate VM within the endpoint.
For each VM, TAPAS evaluates the current VM state along
with the server’s thermal and power profiles to calculate
the probability of violating any of the three operational limits (i.e., thermal, power, and performance). Requests are not
routed to VMs with a high risk of violation.
After the filtering step, TAPAS applies state-of-the-art load
balancing policies in the following order: (1) route requests
to instances that have previously handled requests from the
same customer to maximize KV cache reuse [17, 66, 77]; (2)
concentrate load to reduce energy consumption [69]; and (3)
distribute requests across VMs to optimize performance.

Oversubscription and failures

Oversubscription. Using TAPAS, we can reduce the cooling
and power requirements needed to run the same workload.
When the cloud provider initially provisions cooling and
power for the datacenter, it typically plans for peak baseline
demand. As demand increases, the cloud operator can add
more racks to the existing rows, utilizing the slack created
by TAPAS. Additionally, our TAPAS simulator can be used
with an estimated workload to assess cooling and power
requirements, enabling more precise provisioning.
Failure management. If there is a cooling or power failure, TAPAS recalculates the new available airflow for each
aisle, the power for each row, and the inlet temperature for
each server. Based on this, the request routing will steer
requests away from constrained servers. In addition, the Instance Configurator will decrease the load accordingly. If all
these actions are not enough, TAPAS applies regular power
capping techniques to the IaaS VMs [48].
4.5

Instance Configurator. To run the local LLM instances, we
use vLLM [27], a state-of-the-art LLM inference platform.
Note that TAPAS can also integrate other platforms (e.g.,
TensorRT-LLM [47]) with only minor interface modifications.
The LLM inference engine provides an HTTP REST API that
receives requests from the Load Balancer.
The local TAPAS controller receives the updated thermal
and power profiles for that server on a weekly basis. This controller runs for every LLM iteration to estimate the optimal
operational settings (including GPU frequency, batch size,
model parallelism, model size, and quantization). These computations are lightweight and cached for efficiency. If needed,
the controller updates the settings for each instance running

Implementation

Profiles. TAPAS includes an offline profiling phase that
takes place during the initial stages of datacenter deployment, when operators run benchmarks and validation tests.
This phase models: (1) the datacenter layout, (2) the inlet
temperature of each server, (3) the temperature of each GPU,
9

