Power

Power util (%)

Infrastructure. Datacenters typically implement a threelevel power distribution hierarchy to deliver electricity from
the utility grid to individual servers [74, 79, 83]. At the highest level, an Automatic Transmission Switch (ATS) directs
power from the grid to multiple Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS). Each UPS shares a fraction of the total datacenter
power load and is connected to a series of Power Distribution
Unit (PDU) pairs. These PDU pairs further step down the
voltage and support multiple rows of server racks.

100
75
50
25
0

Row 1
Row 3
Row 2
Row 4
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time (day)

(a) Power utilization over 1-week.

100
75
50
25
0

P50
P99
0 25 50 75 100
Power utilization (%)

(b) Row power distribution.

Figure 10. Power utilization timeline for four sample rows
and power across rows within a datacenter.

Probability (%)

Provisioning. To prevent tripping the circuit breakers, datacenter operators provision for peak power usage at each
level of the hierarchy to account for worst-case scenarios.
For safety, when the total power draw exceeds the power
supply, servers within that level are power-capped. For design simplicity and to reduce implementation costs, these
power limits are further distributed down the hierarchy homogeneously, eventually limiting the number of server racks
that can be provisioned within the budget. Operators can
oversubscribe the power capacity by adding racks to a row,
as long as they remain within the row-level power envelope.

20
15
10
5
0

P100
P99

60 70 80 90 100 110
Temperature (°C) Power (kW)
(a) VM placement.

Max temperature

2.2

CDF rows (%)

TAPAS: Thermal- and Power-Aware Scheduling for LLM Inference in Cloud Platforms

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.8

0.9
1.0
Max power

(b) Temperature vs. power.

Figure 11. Distribution of aisle peak GPU temperature and
row power with 100K random VM placements.

Failures. To ensure high availability, clouds implement redundancy at each power hierarchy level. For instance, prior
work describes a setup with 4N/3 redundancy at the UPS
level and 2N at the PDU level [83]. When a UPS fails, its
load is redistributed among the remaining three units. Under
heavy load, this can push the others over capacity, requiring
each unit to quickly reduce its load to maintain limits, effectively lowering the datacenter capacity to 75%. We focus on
this design as its balances normal and fail-over operation.
Our findings extend to other redundancy models [34, 55].

We quantify this behavior at scale in Figure 10, which shows
the CDF of P50 and P99 power draw across 100 rows in a subset of our datacenters. The figure shows a heavy tail pattern:
50%, 75%, and 90% of the rows draw 28%, 18%, and 10% less
P99 power than the most power-hungry row, respectively.
The high-power rows create hotspots in the datacenter,
requiring sufficient power provisioning to meet the demands
of these rows. Thus, power allocated to lower-demand rows
is wasted, significantly hindering the cloud provider’s ability
to safely oversubscribe. We define this as:
∑︁
∀Row∈𝐷𝐶
𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑠 (Load𝐺𝑃𝑈 ,𝑠 ) ≤ ProvPowerRow (4)

Characterization. Prior works characterize the power profile of GPU servers running LLMs [48, 49]. We complement
these studies with our own data focusing on power imbalances at datacenter scale. We study the same datacenters as
in the cooling section. For confidentiality, we normalize all
values to the maximum power draw.

𝑠 ∈𝑆 Row

GPU load and server power. We measure server power for both
A100 and H100 servers across various utilization levels and
workloads (e.g., Figure 6). Server power is strongly correlated
with GPU load [48, 65]. Even when idle, servers consume
significant power, similar to traditional CPU servers [39].
Besides GPU power, a substantial portion is drawn by fans,
storage, memory, CPUs, and other components [48]. For
each server 𝑠, we used polynomial regression to generate a
function 𝑓𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 (LoadGPU 𝑔,𝑠 ), which accounts for fan power
and other components that also depend on load.

Insight #2: The power demands of GPU clusters present a
strong opportunity for power oversubscription. However,
to safely oversubscribe, the infrastructure must effectively
manage the rows at the tail end that generate hotspots.

3 Characterizing Opportunities in Thermal
and Power Properties of GPU Workloads
To reason about the impact of GPU workloads on thermal
and power properties in cloud datacenters, we (1) analyze the
physical placement of GPU workloads at Azure, (2) profile
SaaS LLM inference workloads from a production environment, and (3) characterize the thermal and power properties
of LLM inference varying a set of configurations with opensource models [72].

Power imbalance across rows. Row power utilization is the
aggregation and multiplexing of individual server power.
Figure 10 shows the power draw of four sample rows in
a datacenter over a week. While most rows exhibit lower
power draw, a few have significantly higher consumption.
5

