J. Stojkovic, C. Zhang, Í. Goiri, E. Choukse, H. Qiu, R. Fonseca, J. Torrellas, and R. Bianchini

5

Evaluation

5.1

Methodology

Norm. peak power

on the VM. It also restarts the LLM instance if changes to
model parallelism, model size, or quantization are necessary.

Policies. As a Baseline, we use a thermal- and power-oblivious
system with traditional VM placement [21] and LLM request routing [1] without any reconfiguration. We implement TAPAS as detailed in Section 4.5 and evaluate six additional variations to assess the impact of each component, as
well as their combinations, on VM placement (Place), request
routing (Route), and instance configuration (Config).

Baseline
TAPAS
0

10

20

30
40
Time (minutes)

50

60

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

90
70

0

Baseline
1
2

TAPAS
3
4
Time (days)

50
5

6

7

30

Max temperature (°C)

Norm. peak power

Figure 18. Peak power over 1-hour for Baseline and TAPAS
while running real cluster experiments.

Workload. For VM arrivals, we use a one-week production
trace from one of the A100 datacenters [46] with a 50/50 split
between IaaS and SaaS workloads. This covers around one
thousand servers with thousands of GPUs. For SaaS LLM
inference, we use Llama2 [72] with the profile from Figure 16.
The requests are a subset from 10 endpoints, each with a VM
count between 23 and 100 (Figure 12b).

Figure 19. Peak power and maximum temperature over 1week for Baseline and TAPAS for large-scale simulations.

Real cluster. We conduct real experiments using a scaleddown version of the production trace, emulating two rows
of 80 servers with a 50/50 IaaS/SaaS mix over one hour. For
SaaS, we run LLM inference across endpoints on Llama2 [72].
For IaaS, we use historical power readings directly.

4% absolute error compared to the simulation, validating the
accuracy of our simulator.
Simulation. Extending to large-scale simulations, Figure 19
shows the maximum temperature and row power over 5minute intervals for one week. Compared to Baseline, TAPAS
reduces the maximum temperature by 15% and peak power
by 24%, all without hurting result quality.

Simulation. To evaluate TAPAS at scale and compare policies under consistent conditions, we built a discrete-time
simulator that models our datacenters as described in Section 2. This simulator replicates the load of IaaS VMs and
the execution of LLM inference requests in SaaS VMs.
For cooling modeling, we use Equations (1) to (3). We evaluated various regression models, including random forests,
multi-layer perceptrons, linear, polynomial, and piecewise
polynomial regressions. Piecewise polynomial achieved an
MAE of <1°C, offering fast computation, efficient storage,
and effective generalization for unseen values (e.g., random
forests tend to overfit and struggle to predict temperatures
lower than those in the training set). These models simulate server temperatures based on IaaS power data and LLM
inference requests for SaaS.
For power, the simulator uses real IaaS power readings and
maps inference load to power consumption for each SaaS VM
(Equation (4)). It also tracks capping events by simulating
their impact on both cooling and power infrastructure.
5.2

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Ablation study. Figure 20 shows the maximum temperature
(top) and peak power (bottom) for the Baseline and variations
of TAPAS over one week, normalized to the maximum provisioned values (indicated by the black lines). Importantly, all
policies operate without affecting quality or causing SLO violations under normal conditions. For a 50/50 mix of IaaS/SaaS
workloads (middle), each individual policy reduces both temperature and power by up to 12% compared to the Baseline,
achieving these reductions by balancing or lowering the local load. Place performs slightly better, as it balances both
IaaS and SaaS workloads across rows, while Route and Config
focus on optimizing only SaaS workloads. Although combining two components yields additional improvements, TAPAS
achieves the largest reductions in temperature and power
(17% and 23%, respectively) through a holistic approach that
integrates placement, routing, and configuration.

TAPAS operation

Sensitivity to IaaS/SaaS fraction. Figure 20 shows the
maximum temperature and power varying the SaaS/IaaS
fractions. As expected, when the workload is entirely IaaS,
TAPAS’s effectiveness is limited to VM placement. Conversely, TAPAS achieves maximum reductions in temperature (23%) and power (28%) compared to the Baseline when
the workload is entirely SaaS, due to its flexibility.

Real cluster. Figure 18 shows the peak row power for the 80
servers in the two rows measured at 1-minute intervals comparing the Baseline and TAPAS. During regular operations,
TAPAS effectively reduces peak power, maintaining latency
SLOs and result quality, achieving a 20% reduction in peak
utilization compared to Baseline. This experiment shows a
10

