TAPAS: Thermal- and Power-Aware Scheduling for
LLM Inference in Cloud Platforms
Jovan Stojkovic†1 Chaojie Zhang Íñigo Goiri Esha Choukse
Haoran Qiu Rodrigo Fonseca Josep Torrellas† Ricardo Bianchini‡

arXiv:2501.02600v1 [cs.DC] 5 Jan 2025

Microsoft Azure Research

‡ Microsoft Azure

† University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

Abstract

Configuration parameters

Perf

Temp

Power

Quality

The rising demand for generative large language models
(LLMs) poses challenges for thermal and power management
in cloud datacenters. Traditional techniques often are inadequate for LLM inference due to the fine-grained, millisecondscale execution phases, each with distinct performance, thermal, and power profiles. Additionally, LLM inference workloads are sensitive to various configuration parameters (e.g.,
model parallelism, size, and quantization) that involve tradeoffs between performance, temperature, power, and output
quality. Moreover, clouds often co-locate SaaS and IaaS workloads, each with different levels of visibility and flexibility.
We propose TAPAS, a thermal- and power-aware framework designed for LLM inference clusters in the cloud. TAPAS
enhances cooling and power oversubscription capabilities,
reducing the total cost of ownership (TCO) while effectively
handling emergencies (e.g., cooling and power failures). The
system leverages historical temperature and power data,
along with the adaptability of SaaS workloads, to: (1) efficiently place new GPU workload VMs within cooling and
power constraints, (2) route LLM inference requests across
SaaS VMs, and (3) reconfigure SaaS VMs to manage load
spikes and emergency situations. Our evaluation on a large
GPU cluster demonstrates significant reductions in thermal
and power throttling events, boosting system efficiency.

Model Size (e.g., 70B→7B)
Quantization (e.g., FP16→FP8)
Parallelism (e.g., TP8→TP2)
Frequency (e.g., 2GHz→1GHz)
Batch Size (e.g., 64→16)

↑
↑
↓
↓
↓

↓
↓
↑
↓
↓

↓
↓
↓
↓
↓

↓↓
↓
−
−
−

1

Table 1. Impact on performance, temperature, power, and
quality of an LLM inference server for multiple parameters.
safe operating temperatures. Space constraints are typically
less of an issue, as GPU servers and racks are power-dense.
Data centers hosting GPU workloads are organized into
rows of server racks equipped with cooling systems to dissipate heat [38] and a power hierarchy for efficient power
distribution [83]. Cooling systems need to manage heat generated by the hottest server at any time. However, cooling
efficiency can vary spatially (e.g., some GPUs within a server
may be hotter) and temporally (e.g., influenced by external
temperatures). Additionally, at each level of the power hierarchy, servers share a common power supply. Hence, exceeding
the total power draw leads to power capping. Proper cooling
and power provisioning is essential during both normal operations and during cooling/power failures and emergencies.
While there have been advances in improving the performance efficiency of LLM inference clusters through software
systems [14, 27, 42, 81, 86], hardware techniques [4, 49, 84],
and model architectures [41, 71], thermal and power have
not received the same attention [48, 56, 65, 67]. Thermal [20,
38, 43, 50] and power [22, 32, 51, 68, 83] management of traditional datacenters have been extensively studied. However,
we observe that the unique characteristics of LLM inference
workloads render the traditional proposals sub-optimal.
We target public clouds that host both Software-as-aService (SaaS) and Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) GPU
workloads. SaaS workloads are transparent GPU VMs managed by the cloud provider, while IaaS workloads are opaque
GPU VMs with no provider visibility. This allows configuration adjustments for SaaS workloads, while IaaS VMs remain unmodifiable. The SaaS workload runs LLM inference,
which involves several configuration parameters (e.g., GPU
frequency, batch size, model parallelism, parameter count,
and precision) that balance performance, thermal output,
power, and result quality, as shown in Table 1. In addition,
LLM inference comprises distinct phases, each with unique
performance, thermal, and power characteristics [49].

Introduction

Motivation. Generative large language models (LLMs) are
increasingly used in various domains, such as healthcare [52],
developer productivity [19], and education [9]. This surge in
usage drives high demand for LLM inference clusters [28],
requiring robust infrastructure with sophisticated software
and costly hardware. LLMs in the cloud typically run on
virtual machines (VMs) powered by the latest GPUs, such as
NVIDIA’s A100 [46] and H100 [45]. These GPUs consume
significant power, challenging the cooling and power capacities of datacenters, major contributors to total cost of
ownership (TCO) [8, 24, 43]. For instance, the A100 and H100
GPUs have thermal design powers (TDP) of 6.5 kW and 10.2
kW, and require substantial cooling capabilities to maintain
1 Jovan Stojkovic is affiliated with the University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign, but was at Microsoft Azure Research during this work.
1

