To Appear in 57th IEEE/ACM Internati

CPElide: Efficient Mult
Synchro
Preyesh Dalmia
ECE Department
NVIDIA, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Santa Clara, CA, USA
pdalmia@nvidia.com

Rajesh

ECE
ARM, Universit
Austi
rajesh.shash

A BSTRACT
Chiplets are transforming computer system designs, allowing system designers to combine heterogeneous computing
resources at unprecedented scales. Breaking larger, monolithic chips into smaller, connected chiplets helps performance
continue scaling, avoids die size limitations, improves yield,
and reduces design and integration costs. However, chipletbased designs introduce an additional level of hierarchy, which
causes indirection and non-uniformity. This clashes with typical heterogeneous systems: unlike CPU-based multi-chiplet
systems, heterogeneous systems do not have significant OS
support or complex coherence protocols to mitigate the impact
of this indirection. Thus, exploiting locality across application
phases is harder in multi-chiplet heterogeneous systems. We
propose CPElide, which utilizes information already available in heterogeneous systems’ embedded microprocessor (the
command processor) to track inter-chiplet data dependencies
and aggressively perform implicit synchronization only when
necessary, instead of conservatively like the state-of-the-art
HMG. Across 24 workloads CPElide improves average performance (13%, 19%), energy (14%, 11%), and network traffic
(14%, 17%), respectively, over current approaches and HMG.
Index Terms—GPGPU, Chiplets, Synchronization, Coherence.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Systems ranging from smartphones to supercomputers are
embracing heterogeneity to improve efficiency. The underlying
technology is also changing. For decades vendors used transistor scaling to fit an order of magnitude more transistors
on a die per technology generation. For example, modern
GPUs often have hundreds of compute units (CUs), 4× more
CUs than the previous decade [64], and run applications with
millions or billions of threads. However, continuing to scale
performance and energy efficiency for future heterogeneous
systems is hampered by technology scaling and Moore’s Law
slowing [63]. General-purpose CPUs and accelerators also
often have different timing, density, and bandwidth requirements. Thus, integrating them on a single die is difficult.
Moreover, cost, die, and yield limitations make designing
larger, monolithic systems difficult [16], [60], [64], [106].

1

