Sparsepipe: Sparse In
Architecture with Cr
Yunan Zhang

Po-An

University of California, Riverside
USA
yzhan828@ucr.edu

NVID
US
poant@nv

Abstract— Sparse Tensor Algebra (STA) applications are
limited by data movement and can benefit from better data
reuse. Prior research has focused on intra-operator data reuse,
such as better dataflow or caching technique for a single STA
operation, missing other reuse opportunities at the application
level. By expressing STA applications as sparse tensor dataflow
graphs, we first identify two unexplored inter-operator data reuse
opportunities: 1) producer-consumer reuse and 2) cross-iteration
reuse. Producer-consumer reuse combines multiple operations to
reduce data movement for intermediate results. Cross-iteration
data reuse, a new opportunity identified in this paper, reduces
the data movement for the shared sparse data (e.g., graph)
across iterations. We then propose Output-stationary-Elementwise-Input-stationary (OEI) dataflow, a novel dataflow to capture
both reuse opportunities in STA applications, and Sparsepipe, a
sparse dataflow architecture to support the OEI dataflow and
maximize data reuse. Evaluation results show that Sparsepipe
with OEI dataflow is 19.82×/4.65× faster than CPU/GPU and
1.77× faster than an ideal sparse accelerator that cannot exploit
inter-operator reuse.
Index Terms—domain-specific accelerators , graph processing,
high-performance and scientific computing.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Sparse tensor algebra (STA) is the key building block of
scientific computing, graph analytics, and machine learning
applications. STA operators such as SpMSpM (sparse matrixsparse matrix multiplication), SpMM (sparse matrix-dense
matrix multiplication), and SpMV (sparse matrix-dense vector
multiplication) contribute to the majority of the runtime of
these applications [25], [44]. Unlike dense tensor algebra, the
data movement limits performance of STA applications due to
their low arithmetic intensity. Thus, maximizing data reuse is
the key to accelerating STA applications.
Prior research focuses on exploiting intra-operator data reuse
to reduce data movement. For example, SpMSpM accelerators [25], [38], [70] propose dataflows with specialized format
and microarchitecture support to minimize data movement in
SpMSpM operations. Other work improves cache locality [8],
[9] of SpMV operations in graph analytics. These ideas push
the system closer to the roofline [62], where STA operations
can fully utilize the available memory bandwidth. However,
the intrinsic low arithmetic intensity in STA operations still
causes many applications to reside in the bandwidth-bound
region of the roofline even with existing optimizations [42].
Any innovative reduction in data movement is still attractive.

