The T YR Dataflow Architecture:
Improving Locality by Taming Parallelism
Nikhil Agarwal, Mitchell Fream, Souradip Ghosh, Brian C. Schwedock,† Nathan Beckmann
{nikhilag, mfream, souradip}@cmu.edu b.schwedock@samsung.com
† Samsung
Carnegie Mellon University

beckmann@cs.cmu.edu

Other approaches to trade off parallelism and state have
limited scope. Data-parallel architectures (e.g., GPUs [11, 39],
TPUs [37], scalable vectors [64, 71], and stream dataflow [54,
62]) assume a large amount of identical, independent work,
allowing the microarchitecture to choose how much work to
execute in parallel. Data-parallel architectures can thus dynamically throttle parallelism to fit live state within the machine’s
finite memories. While highly effective, this approach requires
an SPMD programming model that does not suit all programs,
and these architectures also impose other inessential constraints
on parallelism (e.g., due to branch divergence in GPUs [80]).

Abstract—Architectures should aim to maximize parallelism
within a machine’s finite memories, but prior designs tend to
extremes, either maximizing parallelism or minimizing state. In
particular, prior unordered dataflow architectures suffer from
a parallelism explosion that creates unbounded state, requires
prohibitively large associative memories, and risks deadlock. The
few architectures that successfully navigate the parallelism-state
tradeoff are limited to embarrassingly parallel programs.
TYR is a new, general-purpose unordered dataflow architecture
that achieves high parallelism with bounded state. The key
insight is that prior unordered dataflow architectures are overly
conservative, unnecessarily allocating tags from a single, global
tag space. TYR exploits program structure to break up tags into
local tag spaces that operate independently. Local tag spaces
eliminate tag competition between co-dependent parts of the
program, provably guaranteeing forward progress with only two
tags per local tag space. TYR thus opens the door to an efficient,
scalable implementation of unordered dataflow. Simulation of
parallel programs demonstrates that TYR achieves parallelism
nearly identical to a naïve unordered dataflow architecture with
orders-of-magnitude less state.

Goal: Taming parallelism to improve locality. This paper seeks
a general-purpose architecture that balances parallelism and
live state. Fig. 1 depicts our goal and approach, sketching a
dataflow graph (DFG) of instructions and their dependencies in
a mock program. A sequential architecture like a CPU executes
the DFG in “depth-first” fashion, limiting execution to a narrow
slice of the program at a time and frequently backtracking for
Keywords-Dataflow, parallelism, locality
independent work that could have been executed in parallel.
By contrast, the dataflow architecture executes the DFG in
I. I NTRODUCTION
“breadth-first” fashion, eagerly expanding work as it becomes
HERE IS A FUNDAMENTAL TRADEOFF in computing be- available and thus having to track an exponentially increasing
tween parallelism and live state. The more work done amount of state. Our architecture, T YR, explores a wide, but
in parallel, the more state is required to track it. Too much bounded, segment of the DFG at a time to saturate parallelism
live state can lead to a loss of locality, so more parallelism is without blowing up the amount of live state.
not always better. Generally, the optimal operating point is a
middle ground with sufficient parallelism to keep a processor
busy, but not so much that state overwhelms on-chip memory.

T

Limitations of existing architectures. Unfortunately, even
though the parallelism-state tradeoff has been recognized
for decades [4, 17, 32], no existing architecture satisfactorily
navigates this tradeoff. At one extreme, sequential architectures
like von Neumann CPUs reduce state by severely constraining parallelism. Recovering parallelism from a sequential
architecture is challenging, and these architectures are hard
to scale. At the other extreme, unordered dataflow architectures [52, 58] suffer from “parallelism explosion,” as some
parts of a computation run far ahead of others. Dataflow’s
unbounded state is a longstanding unresolved challenge with
the architecture, which complicates implementation and risks
deadlocking the machine. Existing techniques to limit state in
dataflow are not general [52] or impose arbitrary orderings,
losing parallelism [22, 66, 73].

(a) Seq. von Neumann

(b) Dataflow

(c) TYR

Figure 1: How architectures execute a dynamic dataflow graph (DFG).
Sequential von Neumann architectures have too little parallelism,
exploring the DFG “depth-first”. Dataflow architectures have too
much parallelism, exploring the DFG “breadth-first” and exploding
live state. T YR seeks a general-purpose solution that balances both,
maximizing parallelism within a machine’s finite resources.

Problem: Dataflow cannot safely limit parallelism. Given the
well established difficulty of extracting parallelism from a

† This work was done while the author was at Carnegie Mellon University.

1

