The T YR Dataflo
Improving Locality b

Nikhil Agarwal, Mitchell Fream, Souradip Gho

{nikhilag, mfream, souradip}@cmu.edu b.schwe
Carnegie Mellon Univ

Abstract—Architectures should aim to maximize parallelism
within a machine’s finite memories, but prior designs tend to
extremes, either maximizing parallelism or minimizing state. In
particular, prior unordered dataflow architectures suffer from
a parallelism explosion that creates unbounded state, requires
prohibitively large associative memories, and risks deadlock. The
few architectures that successfully navigate the parallelism-state
tradeoff are limited to embarrassingly parallel programs.
TYR is a new, general-purpose unordered dataflow architecture
that achieves high parallelism with bounded state. The key
insight is that prior unordered dataflow architectures are overly
conservative, unnecessarily allocating tags from a single, global
tag space. TYR exploits program structure to break up tags into
local tag spaces that operate independently. Local tag spaces
eliminate tag competition between co-dependent parts of the
program, provably guaranteeing forward progress with only two
tags per local tag space. TYR thus opens the door to an efficient,
scalable implementation of unordered dataflow. Simulation of
parallel programs demonstrates that TYR achieves parallelism
nearly identical to a naïve unordered dataflow architecture with
orders-of-magnitude less state.
Keywords-Dataflow, parallelism, locality

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HERE IS A FUNDAMENTAL TRADEOFF in computing be-

tween parallelism and live state. The more work done
in parallel, the more state is required to track it. Too much
live state can lead to a loss of locality, so more parallelism is
not always better. Generally, the optimal operating point is a
middle ground with sufficient parallelism to keep a processor
busy, but not so much that state overwhelms on-chip memory.
Limitations of existing architectures. Unfortunately, even
though the parallelism-state tradeoff has been recognized
for decades [4, 17, 32], no existing architecture satisfactorily
navigates this tradeoff. At one extreme, sequential architectures
like von Neumann CPUs reduce state by severely constraining parallelism. Recovering parallelism from a sequential
architecture is challenging, and these architectures are hard
to scale. At the other extreme, unordered dataflow architectures [52, 58] suffer from “parallelism explosion,” as some
parts of a computation run far ahead of others. Dataflow’s
unbounded state is a longstanding unresolved challenge with
the architecture, which complicates implementation and risks
deadlocking the machine. Existing techniques to limit state in
dataflow are not general [52] or impose arbitrary orderings,
losing parallelism [22, 66, 73].
† This work was done while the author was at Carnegie Mellon University.

1

