Sparsepipe: Sparse Inter-operator Dataflow
Architecture with Cross-Iteration Reuse
Yunan Zhang

Po-An Tsai

Hung-Wei Tseng

University of California, Riverside
USA
yzhan828@ucr.edu

NVIDIA
USA
poant@nvidia.com

University of California, Riverside
USA
htseng@ucr.edu

Conventionally, implementing STA applications requires
hand-written and format-specific code with nested loops and
application-specific logic, muddling opportunities to reduce
data movements. Fortunately, recent developments in domainspecific STA languages and compilers [11], [19], [35], [51]
alleviate the programming burden by generating low-level
code for STA applications. Frameworks with tensor and
dataflow abstractions, such as TensorFlow [2], PyTorch [28],
GraphBLAS [16], and ALP [69], offer new abstractions for
STA applications. Such novel abstraction with a dataflow graph
presents data reuse opportunities beyond a single operator.
We find that there are two unexplored, inter-operator reuse
opportunities for STA applications. First, producer-consumer
data reuse reduces data movement by combining multiple tensor operations into a single, large fused operation. Prevalent in
dataflow graphs, producer-consumer reuse is typically captured
by forming pipelines of operations to keep intermediate results
in on-chip buffers. While producer-consumer data reuse has
been exploited widely in dense tensor algebra [3], limited work
has explored this reuse opportunity in architecture for STA.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Second, cross-iteration data reuse is a new reuse opporSparse tensor algebra (STA) is the key building block of tunity revealed in this paper, which extends beyond single or
scientific computing, graph analytics, and machine learning adjacent STA operations. By unrolling loops or stages in STA
applications. STA operators such as SpMSpM (sparse matrix- applications, it is possible to fuse multiple identical operations
sparse matrix multiplication), SpMM (sparse matrix-dense (e.g., SpMV in a while-loop) and reduce memory traffic across
matrix multiplication), and SpMV (sparse matrix-dense vector iterations. No prior work has identified this opportunity, and
multiplication) contribute to the majority of the runtime of harnessing cross-iteration data reuse requires a novel dataflow
these applications [25], [44]. Unlike dense tensor algebra, the (Section III) and corresponding hardware supports (Section IV).
data movement limits performance of STA applications due to
To exploit these inter-operator reuse opportunities, this paper
their low arithmetic intensity. Thus, maximizing data reuse is proposes (a) OEI dataflow, which facilitates inter-operator
the key to accelerating STA applications.
data reuse, and (b) Sparsepipe–Sparse Inter-operator Dataflow
Prior research focuses on exploiting intra-operator data reuse Architecture, which incorporates key features:
to reduce data movement. For example, SpMSpM accelera- • A dynamic execution pipeline with compute cores for each
tors [25], [38], [70] propose dataflows with specialized format
stage of the OEI dataflow. These cores support the diverse
and microarchitecture support to minimize data movement in
semiring operations prevalent in common STA applications,
SpMSpM operations. Other work improves cache locality [8],
extending its applicability beyond HPC/DNN.
[9] of SpMV operations in graph analytics. These ideas push • An efficient on-chip buffer that streamlines the data supply
the system closer to the roofline [62], where STA operations
to compute cores in the OEI dataflow.
can fully utilize the available memory bandwidth. However, • A set of intelligent control and management policies to
the intrinsic low arithmetic intensity in STA operations still
schedule computation and data access tasks in sub-tensor
causes many applications to reside in the bandwidth-bound
manners to maximize data reuse, targeting the producerregion of the roofline even with existing optimizations [42].
consumer and cross-iteration reuse opportunities.
Any innovative reduction in data movement is still attractive. • A sparse tensor preprocessing algorithm, including blocking

Abstract— Sparse Tensor Algebra (STA) applications are
limited by data movement and can benefit from better data
reuse. Prior research has focused on intra-operator data reuse,
such as better dataflow or caching technique for a single STA
operation, missing other reuse opportunities at the application
level. By expressing STA applications as sparse tensor dataflow
graphs, we first identify two unexplored inter-operator data reuse
opportunities: 1) producer-consumer reuse and 2) cross-iteration
reuse. Producer-consumer reuse combines multiple operations to
reduce data movement for intermediate results. Cross-iteration
data reuse, a new opportunity identified in this paper, reduces
the data movement for the shared sparse data (e.g., graph)
across iterations. We then propose Output-stationary-Elementwise-Input-stationary (OEI) dataflow, a novel dataflow to capture
both reuse opportunities in STA applications, and Sparsepipe, a
sparse dataflow architecture to support the OEI dataflow and
maximize data reuse. Evaluation results show that Sparsepipe
with OEI dataflow is 19.82×/4.65× faster than CPU/GPU and
1.77× faster than an ideal sparse accelerator that cannot exploit
inter-operator reuse.
Index Terms—domain-specific accelerators , graph processing,
high-performance and scientific computing.

