Schrodinger's FP Training Neural Networks with Dynamic Floating-Point Containers
Schrodinger's FP Training Neural Networks with Dynamic Floating-Point Containers
Miloš Nikolić, Enrique Torres Sanchez, Jiahui Wang, Ali Hadi Zadeh, Mostafa Mahmoud, Ameer Abdelhadi, Kareem Ibrahim, Andreas Moshovos
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
The transfer of tensors from/to memory during neural network training dominates time and energy. To improve energy efficiency and performance, research has been exploring ways to use narrower data representations. So far, these attempts relied on user-directed trial-and-error to achieve convergence. We present methods that relieve users from this responsibility. Our methods dynamically adjust the size and format of the floating-point containers used for activations and weights during training, achieving adaptivity across three dimensions: i) which datatype to use, ii) on which tensor, and iii) how it changes over time. The different meanings and distributions of exponent and mantissas lead us to tailored approaches for each. We present two lossy pairs of methods to eliminate as many mantissa and exponent bits as possible without affecting accuracy. Quantum Mantissa and Quantum Exponent are machine learning compression methods that tap into the gradient descent algorithm to learn the minimal mantissa and exponent bitlengths on a per-layer granularity. They automatically learn that many tensors can use just 1 or 2 mantissa bits and 3 or 4 exponent bits. Overall, the two machine learning methods reduce the footprint by $4.73\times$. Alternatively, BitWave observes changes in the loss function during training to adjust mantissa and exponent bitlengths network-wide, yielding a $3.17\times$ reduction in footprint. Finally, we present an optional method, Gecok, to exploit the naturally emerging, lop-sided exponent distribution to losslessly compress resulting exponents from Quantum Exponent or BitWave and, on average, improve compression rates to $5.61\times$ and $4.53\times$.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly