CloudEval-YAML: A Practical Benchmark for Cloud Configuration Generation
CloudEval-YAML: A Practical Benchmark for Cloud Configuration Generation
Yifei Xu, Yuning Chen, Xumiao Zhang, Xianshang Lin, Pan Hu, Yunfei Ma, Songwu Lu, Wan Du, Z. Morley Mao, Dennis Cai, Ennan Zhai
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Among the thriving ecosystem of cloud computing and the proliferation of Large Language Model (LLM)-based code generation tools, there is a lack of benchmarking for code generation in cloud-native applications. In response to this need, we present CloudEval-YAML, a practical benchmark for cloud configuration generation. CloudEval-YAML tackles the diversity challenge by focusing on YAML, the de facto standard of numerous cloud-native tools. We develop the CloudEval-YAML benchmark with practicality in mind: the dataset consists of hand-written problems with unit tests targeting practical scenarios. We further enhanced the dataset to meet practical needs by rephrasing questions in a concise, abbreviated, and bilingual manner. The dataset consists of 1011 problems that take more than 1200 human hours to complete. To improve practicality during evaluation, we build a scalable evaluation platform for CloudEval-YAML that achieves a 20 times speedup over a single machine. To the best of our knowledge, the CloudEval-YAML dataset is the first hand-written dataset targeting cloud-native applications. We present an in-depth evaluation of 12 LLMs, leading to a deeper understanding of the problems and LLMs, as well as effective methods to improve task performance and reduce cost.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly