Does Compressing Activations Help Model Parallel Training?
Does Compressing Activations Help Model Parallel Training?
Song Bian, Dacheng Li, Hongyi Wang, Eric P. Xing, Shivaram Venkataraman
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Foundation models have superior performance across a wide array of machine learning tasks. The training of these models typically involves model parallelism (MP) to navigate the constraints of GPU memory capacity. However, MP strategies involve transmitting model activations between GPUs, which can hinder training speed in large clusters. Previous research has examined gradient compression in data-parallel contexts, but its applicability in MP settings remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we investigate the unique characteristics of compression in MP and study why strategies from gradient compression might not be directly applicable to MP scenarios. Subsequently, to systematically understand the capabilities and limitations of \underline{M}odel Parallelism \underline{C}ompression, we present a benchmarking framework \textbf{MCBench}. MCBench not only includes four major categories of compression algorithms but also includes several widely used models spanning language and vision tasks on a well-established distributed training framework, Megatron-LM. We initiate the first comprehensive empirical study by using MCBench. Our empirical study encompasses both the fine-tuning and pre-training of FMs. We probe over 200 unique training configurations and present results using 10 widely used datasets. To comprehend the scalability of compression advantages with the expansion of model size and cluster size, we propose a novel cost model designed specifically for training with MP compression. The insights derived from our findings can help direct the future development of new MP compression algorithms for distributed training.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly