Proteus: Preserving Model Confidentiality during Graph Optimizations
Proteus: Preserving Model Confidentiality during Graph Optimizations
Yubo Gao, Maryam Haghifam, Christina Giannoula, Renbo Tu, Gennady Pekhimenko, Nandita Vijaykumar
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
Deep learning (DL) models have revolutionized numerous domains, yet optimizing them for computational efficiency remains a challenging endeavor. Development of new DL models typically involves two parties: the model developers and performance optimizers. The exchange between the parties often necessitates exposing the model architecture and computational graph to the optimizers. However, this exposure is undesirable since the model architecture is an important intellectual property, and its innovations require significant investments and expertise. During the exchange, the model is also vulnerable to adversarial attacks via model stealing.This paper presents Proteus, a novel mechanism that enables model optimization by an independent party while preserving the confidentiality of the model architecture. Proteus obfuscates the protected model by partitioning its computational graph into subgraphs and concealing each subgraph within a large pool of generated realistic subgraphs that cannot be easily distinguished from the original. We evaluate Proteus on a range of DNNs, demonstrating its efficacy in preserving confidentiality without compromising performance optimization opportunities. Proteus effectively hides the model as one alternative among up to $10^{32}$ possible model architectures, and is resilient against attacks with a learning-based adversary. We also demonstrate that heuristicbased and manual approaches are ineffective in identifying the protected model.To our knowledge, Proteus is the first work that tackles the challenge of model confidentiality during performance optimization. Proteus will be open-sourced for direct use and experimentation, with easy integration with compilers such as ONNXRuntime.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly