VIDUR: A LARGE-SCALE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM INFERENCE
VIDUR: A LARGE-SCALE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM INFERENCE
Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Jayashree Mohan, Ashish Panwar, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S. Gulavani, Ramachandran Ramjee, Alexey Tumanov
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are widely used in various domains for their ability to perform tasks that requirehuman-like skills. However, LLM inference is expensive today. Furthermore, optimizing LLM inference ischallenging, as its performance depends on many configuration options such as model parallelization strategy, thebatching algorithm, scheduling policy, maximum batch size allowed, etc. Identifying the optimal configuration fora large-scale cluster by experimentally running hundreds of configuration combinations is impractical due to theexorbitant time and monetary cost involved. To tackle this challenge, we present VIDUR and VIDUR-BENCH,the first large-scale, high-fidelity, collaborative, and easily extensible simulation framework for LLM inferencealongside a benchmark suite. VIDUR carefully models the performance of various operators involved in LLMinference using a combination of experimental profiling and predictive modeling, and evaluates the end-to-endmodel inference performance for different workloads by estimating several key performance metrics such aslatency, throughput, and time-to-first-byte. We experimentally validate our simulator on several LLMs and showthat it can estimate metrics such as inference latency and throughput with less than 5% error rate. VIDUR alsohelps answer large-scale deployment related what-if questions such as what is the best tensor-parallel dimension tomaximize serving throughput of the LlaMa-7B model across 32 A100 GPUs? We will open-source the simulatorcode, along with the workload benchmark suite, so that researchers and practitioners can collaboratively exploremodel and systems optimizations for efficient deployment of LLMs.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly