HeteroSwitch: Characterizing and Taming System-Induced Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning
HeteroSwitch: Characterizing and Taming System-Induced Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning
Gyudong Kim, Mehdi Ghasemi, Soroush Heidari, Seungryong Kim, Young Geun Kim, Sarma Vrudhula, Carole-Jean Wu
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6  (MLSys 2024)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a practical approach to train deep learning models collaboratively across user-end devices, protecting user privacy by retaining raw data on-device. In FL, participating user-end devices are highly fragmented in terms of hardware and software configurations. Such fragmentation introduces a new type of data heterogeneity in FL, namely system-induced data heterogeneity, as each device generates distinct data depending on its hardware and software configurations. In this paper, we first characterize the impact of system-induced data heterogeneity on FL model performance. We collect a dataset using heterogeneous devices with variations across vendors and performance tiers. By using this dataset, we demonstrate that system-induced data heterogeneity negatively impacts accuracy, and deteriorates fairness and domain generalization problems in FL. To address these challenges, we propose HeteroSwitch, which adaptively adopts generalization techniques (i.e., ISP transformation and SWAD) depending on the level of bias caused by varying HW and SW configurations. In our evaluation with a realistic FL dataset (FLAIR), HeteroSwitch reduces the variance of averaged precision by 6.3% across device types.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked. However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues. Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly