Scaling Automated Database System Testing
Suyang Zhong
suyang@u.nus.edu
National University of Singapore
Singapore, Singapore
Manuel Rigger
rigger@nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore, Singapore
Abstract
Recently, various automated testing approaches have been
proposed that use specialized test oracles to find hundreds
of logic bugs in mature, widely-used Database Management
Systems (DBMSs). These test oracles require database and
query generators, which must account for the often signifi-
cant differences between the SQL dialects of these systems.
Since it can take weeks to implement such generators, many
DBMS developers are unlikely to invest the time to adopt
such automated testing approaches. In short, existing ap-
proaches fail to scale to the plethora of DBMSs. In this work,
we present both a vision and a platform, SQLancer++, to apply
test oracles to any SQL-based DBMS that supports a subset
of common SQL features. Our technical core contribution is
a novel architecture for an adaptive SQL statement generator.
This adaptive SQL generator generates SQL statements with
various features, some of which might not be supported by
the given DBMS, and then learns through interaction with
the DBMS, which of these are understood by the DBMS.
Thus, over time, the generator will generate mostly valid
SQL statements. We evaluated SQLancer++ across 18 DBMSs
and discovered a total of 196 unique, previously unknown
bugs, of which 180 were fixed after we reported them. While
SQLancer++ is the first major step towards scaling automated
DBMS testing, various follow-up challenges remain.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Soft-
ware testing and debugging; • Information systems →
Data management systems.
Keywords: Database systems; automated testing; test case
generation
ACM Reference Format:
Suyang Zhong and Manuel Rigger. 2026. Scaling Automated Data-
base System Testing. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’26), March 22–26, 2026,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790215
ASPLOS ’26, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal
use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in
Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’26),
March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.
3790215.
1 Introduction
Database Management Systems (DBMSs) are large, complex
software systems. For example, MySQL consists of more than
5.5 million lines of code (LOC), and PostgreSQL has more
than 1.7 million LOC. Unsurprisingly, such DBMSs can be
affected by bugs. Automated testing approaches for DBMSs
have been proposed to find so-called logic bugs [2, 15, 29, 35–
37, 43, 47], which are bugs that cause a system to silently
compute an incorrect result, making such bugs notoriously
difficult to find. Many existing works aiming to find logic
bugs proposed so-called test oracles that can validate whether
a query computes the correct result by transforming it in a
semantic-preserving way and checking both queries’ results’
equivalence. Overall, these approaches have found hundreds
of bugs in widely-known DBMSs such as SQLite, MySQL,
and PostgreSQL.
It would be ideal to apply automated DBMS testing ap-
proaches to the thousands of existing DBMSs.1 The market
for DBMSs is significant, currently being 162.25 billion USD
and growing at a compound annual growth rate of 15.2% [7],
fueling the development of new DBMSs, as well as further
development of existing ones. With the end of Moore’s law,
various trends have set in posing new reliability challenges,
such as the development of new, increasingly specialized
DBMSs, often based on SQL and the relational model. In ad-
dition, existing DBMSs are becoming increasingly complex,
by using accelerators [17, 23, 42], or incorporating learned
components [16, 24, 32]. Overall, ensuring the correctness
of DBMSs will become increasingly difficult.
Despite the significant, increasing need to apply auto-
mated testing approaches for DBMSs at scale, much effort
is needed to implement and operate them. A key challenge
for current automated testing approaches is that test-case
generators, which generate SQL statements that create a
database, populate it with data, and execute queries, must be
manually implemented to account for the differences in SQL
dialects [35, 38]. Doing so typically requires implementing
thousands of lines of code. For example, SQLancer [2, 3, 35–
37], a state-of-the-art tool for DBMS testing, currently sup-
ports generators for 22 DBMSs, which, on average, are imple-
mented in 3,729 LOC (see Figure 1), with some DBMS-specific
components being contributed by major companies. How-
ever, most DBMS development teams are unlikely to invest
this effort. For example, a Vitess blog post describes that they
considered using SQLancer, but realized that “It would take a
1See https://dbdb.io/
arXiv:2503.21424v2
[cs.SE]
26
Jan
2026
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Suyang Zhong and Manuel Rigger
SQLancer Squirrel SQLsmith EET
Tools
103
104
Lines
of
Code
(LOC)
3665
7909
268
574
Figure 1. The lines of code needed in popular DBMS testing
tools [22, 37, 38, 54] for DBMS-specific components, where
the orange line shows the median. Note that we only consid-
ered the core part of the generator of each DBMS.
lot of work to properly integrate Vitess with SQLancer, due to
each DBMS tester in SQLancer essentially being written com-
pletely separately with similar logic.” [48] While Vitess aims
to be MySQL-compatible, and SQLancer provides a MySQL
implementation, in practice, various differences still exist
that make it difficult to reuse generators in such a scenario.
In this work, we introduce our vision of applying testing
DBMSs at scale. We propose a new automated testing plat-
form, SQLancer++, as part of our ongoing effort to reduce
the effort of implementing and operating DBMS testing ap-
proaches. The main technical contribution of this work is
an adaptive query generator, which infers to generate state-
ments that are understood by the DBMS under test. This
generator repeatedly sends SQL test cases to the DBMS; if
a SQL feature is not understood, the generator will prevent
its generation and thus, over time, increase the validity rate
of generated statements. Such a generator is unlikely to per-
form as well as one that is implemented for a specific system;
however, it can be directly applied without additional im-
plementation effort. In addition, any added features might
also be immediately applicable to other DBMSs. Other key
design decisions include an internal model of the database
schema, to eschew avoiding querying schema information
from DBMSs, which often requires using DBMS-specific in-
terfaces. Finally, we propose a synergistic and pragmatic
bug-prioritization approach, which reports bug-inducing
tests only if its features are not present in previously re-
ported bugs. Overall, we believe that these techniques are
both simple and practical.
Our results are promising, as we have found and reported
196 unique bugs across 18 DBMSs, demonstrating that the
approach is effective and scalable. As our bug-finding efforts
on these systems have not yet saturated, we are still report-
ing more bugs. 180 bugs have already been fixed, indicating
that the developers considered the bugs important. The feed-
back mechanism in the adaptive generator significantly in-
creased the validity rate of statements; for SQLite, by 292.5%.
Similarly, the prioritization approach has shown promise. In
CrateDB, SQLancer++ identified over 60K bug-inducing cases
in an hour on average, which the bug prioritizer reduced to
35.8, with 11.4 being unique bugs.
SQLancer++ is the first step towards an automated testing
platform for DBMSs that can find bugs at a large scale, sim-
ilar to platforms such as OSS-Fuzz [39] and syzkaller [14],
which tackled the problem of scaling general-purpose grey-
box fuzzers like AFL, as well as kernel fuzzing. Overall, we
hope that SQLancer++ will have a significant impact in im-
proving the reliability of DBMSs at large and, in particu-
lar, help smaller DBMS development teams that cannot in-
vest significant resources into testing. To facilitate future
research and adoption, we have released SQLancer++ at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18289297.
In summary, we propose the following:
• At a conceptual level, we have identified the prob-
lem of scaling existing DBMS testing approaches and
propose a new testing platform, SQLancer++ to apply
previously-proposed test oracles at scale.
• At a technical level, we propose an adaptive query
generator, a model-based schema representation, as
well as a bug-prioritization approach for logic bugs.
• At an empirical level, we show that these techniques
are highly effective, and already found 196 unique,
previously unknown bugs in popular DBMSs.
2 Background and Motivation
SQLancer is among the most popular automated testing tools
for DBMSs, supports over 20 DBMSs, and is widely used by
DBMS developers. While the SQLancer authors proposed
various approaches built on it [2–4, 35–37], also other tools
have been prototyped on it [30, 34, 44, 45]. Thus, we focus on
SQLancer to motivate the limitations of existing approaches.
Different from other fuzzing approaches, such as SQLsmith,
SQLancer implements various state-of-the-art test oracles [2,
3, 35–37] for finding logic and performance issues.
SQL generators. At the core of automated DBMS testing
tools like SQLancer are DBMS-specific, rule-based SQL gen-
erators. Listing 1 shows a simplified excerpt of a SQLancer
generator for CREATE INDEX statements. Line 2 uses a string
to represent a CREATE statement, to which, subsequently,
other elements such as INDEX are added. To create an index,
schema information is required. Specifically, line 7 deter-
mines an index name that is not yet present in the database,
and line 9 determines an existing table, on which the in-
dex should be created. SQLancer—as well as other DBMS
