Parameterized Hardware Design with
Latency-Abstract Interfaces
Rachit Nigam
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA
Ethan Gabizon∗
Cornell University
Ithaca, USA
Edmund Lam∗
Cornell University
Ithaca, USA
Carolyn Zech
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, USA
Jonathan Balkind
University of California
Santa Barbara, USA
Adrian Sampson
Cornell University
Ithaca, USA
Abstract
Hardware designs must use latency-insensitive (LI) inter-
faces when timing is input-dependent. When timing is input-
independent, designs should use latency-sensitive (LS) in-
terfaces for maximum performance. However, designs com-
monly use LI interfaces to integrate with externally gener-
ated LS modules–from, e.g., IP generators, high-level synthe-
sis, or domain specific languages. In every fully integrated
design, such uses of LI represent pure overhead. The chal-
lenge is that generators can dramatically change timing in-
terfaces of the modules to meet performance objectives, and
LI interfaces act as a useful design abstraction and enable
timing adaptation.
We define latency-abstract (LA) interfaces, a new design
abstraction, which provide the timing adaptability of LI in-
terfaces at design-time and the efficient integration of LS in-
terfaces. LA interfaces use output parameters, a novel compile-
time mechanism for child modules to return values parent
modules, to abstract and encapsulate timing behaviors at de-
sign time. During design elaboration, LA interfaces are com-
piled into efficient LS interfaces based on parameter values.
While an attractive option, LA interfaces inherit the com-
plexities of parameterized hardware design: the user must
reason how parameters influence timing behaviors of mod-
ules and ensure that designs adapt to interface changes. To
address this challenge and demonstrate the utility of LA in-
terfaces, we design Lilac, a parameterized HDL that uses
a type system track the influence of parameters on timing
behaviors and formally guarantee that every parameteriza-
tion of an LA design results in a circuit without structural
hazards. We demonstrate Lilac’s efficacy by using it to im-
plement parameterized designs and integrate designs gener-
ated from external tools. We show that LA designs use 26–
33% fewer chip resources and achieve 6.8% better maximum
frequencies than comparable LI implementations.
∗
Equal contribution.
1 Introduction
Interfaces create the foundation for modular design: they ab-
stract away implementation concerns while providing suffi-
cient details to enable compositional and efficient integra-
tion. In hardware design, interfaces consist of both struc-
tural details, such as the bitwidths of input and output ports,
and temporal behaviors, such as how often a module can ac-
cept new inputs.
Hardware interfaces’ temporal behavior broadly falls into
two categories: latency sensitive (LS) or latency insensitive
(LI).1 With LI interfaces, these concerns take the form of
explicit control signals, such as valid and ready ports that
indicate when a module has produced an output or is ready
to accept an input. LS interfaces, on the other hand, spec-
ify input-independent timing behaviors (“a four-cycle mul-
tiplier that accepts new inputs every other cycle”) and are
efficient because communicating modules can simply use
the already-available clock signal for synchronization. LI in-
terfaces come with fundamental overhead of extra synchro-
nization logic, but they are necessary for handling hardware
units where latencies are fundamentally input-dependent.
Hardware designers also use LI interfaces to decouple mod-
ules from each other, even when those modules have input-
independent latency. One particularly important use case is
when integrating generated hardware modules using core
generators [1, 6, 9], high-level synthesis [30, 36], or acceler-
ator design languages [8, 11, 12, 22, 27]. Even when a gener-
ated hardware module could technically use an LS interface,
it would be awkward to use because the timing behavior
depends on the generator’s inputs. For example, changing
the arithmetic precision of a floating-point core generator
might change the resulting module’s latency and pipeline
depth; the designer would then need to manually inspect
the tool’s output and carefully cascade the change through-
out their design. In this scenario, LI interfaces are a conve-
nient but expensive design abstraction: an LS interface would
suffice, but it would require frequent and invasive changes
whenever the generated module changes.
1
Though these terms focus on latency, they are used for interfaces that
capture both latency and initiation interval information.
Rachit Nigam et al.
There is an alternative: using compile-time parameteriza-
tion constructs to adapt to modules’ changing timing behav-
iors and to automatically emit the correct LS interface. We
define a latency-abstract (LA) design as the approach that
uses parameterized LS designs to abstract over timing de-
tails. Because interfaces in LA designs are a compile-time
abstraction, they provide the best of both worlds: the effi-
ciency of LS interfaces and the flexibility of LI interfaces.
However, mainstream HDLs often make LA design infea-
sible for two reasons:
1. Parameters in mainstream HDLs flow in the wrong di-
rection (Figure 3). They make it easy to pass values
from parent modules to the child modules they in-
stantiate: for example, code that instantiates a multi-
plier might specify its numerical precision as a param-
eter. But when using hardware generators, it is the
generator that determines timing behavior, not the
module that uses the generator. There is no straight-
forward way for the generated multiplier to pass pa-
rameters capturing timing behaviors “upward” to its
parent. Developers therefore resort to ad hoc and error-
prone workarounds such as using hierarchical param-
eter assignments [19] or external configuration files [31].
2. LA interfaces require subtle reasoning about the influ-
ence of parameters on timing behaviors. Parameter-
ized designs are already difficult: they express fami-
lies of circuits, requiring testing across many different
parameterizations to gain confidence in their correct-
ness. The addition of complex, parameter-dependent
timing behaviors make them even more unappealing
to use.
Together, these limitations make LA interfaces challenging
to use and leave users of mainstream HDLs with an undesir-
able trade-off: pay the cost of an inefficient LI interface or
risk writing brittle parameterization code.
We address the first challenge by introducing output pa-
rameters, a novel, compile-time construct that enables child
modules to return parameter values to their parents. Out-
put parameters precisely capture the kind of inverted flow
needed to express the interfaces of generated modules. We
show that LA interfaces with output parameters can express
generated module interfaces correctly and concisely (§6).
We address the second challenge by designing Lilac, a
parameterized HDL that uses output parameters to enable
compile-time reasoning and verification of LA circuits. Lilac
programs can explicitly capture LA interface and integrate
generated modules (§3). Lilac uses a novel type system (§4)
based on timeline types [28] to ensure that every possible pa-
rameterization of a design will correctly interface with such
modules and lowers them into efficient circuit descriptions
Mult
Add
(a) LS FPU, fixed timing.
Mult
Add
(b) LI FPU, flexible timing.
Figure 1. Circuit diagrams for different arithmetic unit
(FPU) implementations that can adapt to changing timing
interfaces of multipliers and adders.
1 module FPU(clk, a, b, op, out);
2 wire [31:0] add_o, mul_o, add_d[1:0]; wire [3:0] op_d;
3 Add(.clk, .a, .b, .out(add_o)) add;
4 Mul(.clk, .a, .b, .out(mul_o)) mul;
5 always @(posedge clk)
6 op_d <= { op, op_d[3:1] };
7 add_d[1] <= add_o; add_d[0] <= add_d[1];
8 assign out = op_d[0] ? add_d[0] : mul_o;
9 endmodule
Figure 2. FPU with four-cycle multiply and two-cycle adder.
The implementation delays the adder’s output and the op
signal to balance the pipeline.
(§5). Finally, we demonstrate that Lilac can be used to imple-
ment efficient LA designs which have substantially lower re-
source usage and higher clock frequencies compared to sim-
ilar LI designs (§7). These features let Lilac flexibly express
LA designs that offer the compositionality and correctness
of LI interfaces without their overheads.
2 Integrating Generated Hardware
We motivate the need for latency-abstract interfaces by de-
signing a floating-point unit (FPU) that integrates high-quality
adder and multiplier implementations generated by FloPoCo [6],
an FPGA-focused floating-point core generator. This section
examines what integrating such generated modules looks
like when using LS, LI, and parameterized design with cur-
rent HDLs. We then highlight the potential benefits of LA
design and the challenges it poses with traditional HDLs.
2.1 Latency-Sensitive Interfaces
FloPoCo accepts as input which computation to imple-
ment (add, multiply) and performance goals (frequency, FPGA
family) to target; it outputs a pipelined, LS implementation
and reports its latency. Alternating the performance goals
may change the LS interface to the module in unpredictable
ways.
