Arancini: A Hybrid Binary Translator for Weak
Memory Model Architectures
Sebastian Reimers∗
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
sebastian.reimers@tum.de
Dennis Sprokholt∗†
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
dennis.sprokholt@tum.de
Martin Fink
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
martin.fink@cit.tum.de
Theofilos Augoustis
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
theofilos.augoustis@tum.de
Simon Kammermeier
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
simon.kammermeier@tum.de
Rodrigo C. O. Rocha‡
Huawei Research
Edinburgh, UK
rodrigo.rocha@huawei.com
Tom Spink
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, UK
tcs6@st-andrews.ac.uk
Redha Gouicem
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
gouicem@cs.rwth-
aachen.de
Soham Chakraborty§
TU Delft
Delft, Netherlands
s.s.chakraborty@tudelft.nl
Pramod Bhatotia§
TU Munich
Munich, Germany
pramod.bhatotia@tum.de
Abstract
Binary translation is a powerful approach to support cross-
architecture emulation of unmodified binaries in increas-
ingly heterogeneous computing environments. However, bi-
nary translation systems face correctness issues, due to the
strong-on-weak memory model mismatch (e.g., from x86-64
to Arm/RISC-V) for concurrent programs. Besides, the cur-
rent landscape of binary translation systems is fundamen-
tally limited in terms of completeness for static systems and
performance for dynamic ones.
To address these limitations, we propose Arancini, a hy-
brid binary translator system designed and implemented
from the ground up that strives for correct, complete, and ef-
ficient emulation for weak memory model architectures. Our
system makes three foundational contributions to achieve
these design goals: ArancinIR, a unified intermediate repre-
sentation for static and dynamic binary translators; a formal-
ization of ArancinIR’s memory model and formally verified
mapping schemes from x86-64 to Arm and RISC-V, to en-
sure strong-on-weak correctness; and Arancini, a complete
∗Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
†Work done while the author was at TU Delft.
‡Work done while the author was at the University of Edinburgh.
§Jointly led the project.
ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0International
License.
ASPLOS ’26, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2359-9/2026/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790127
and performant hybrid binary translator, implementing the
verified mapping schemes for correctness.
We evaluate Arancini using a multi-threaded benchmark
suite with two backends (Arm and RISC-V), and show that
Arancini can be up to 5× faster than QEMU-based transla-
tors while ensuring correctness and completeness.
To our knowledge, Arancini is the first hybrid binary
translator whose implementation is guided by formal proofs,
to ensure correct execution of strong memory guests on
weak memory hosts. It is also the first translator to address
mixed-sized accesses for Arm targets.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Com-
pilers; Formal methods; • Theory of computation →
Concurrency.
Keywords: Binary translation; Memory models; Formal ver-
ification
ACM Reference Format:
Sebastian Reimers, Dennis Sprokholt, Martin Fink, Theofilos Au-
goustis, Simon Kammermeier, Rodrigo C. O. Rocha, Tom Spink,
Redha Gouicem, Soham Chakraborty, and Pramod Bhatotia. 2026.
Arancini: A Hybrid Binary Translator for Weak Memory Model Ar-
chitectures. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’26), March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3779212.3790127
1 Introduction
In the last decade, the landscape of heterogeneous computing
hardware has greatly evolved, with a shift from the dominat-
ing x86-64 architecture to new Instruction Set Architectures
(ISAs) such as Arm and RISC-V [9, 14]. This change stems
from the industry’s demand for better performance, energy
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Sebastian Reimers et al.
efficiency, and licensing [34, 80]. For instance, Arm CPUs are
now being deployed widely, including Google Axion [88], Ap-
ple M3 [42], AWS Graviton [17], Microsoft Cobalt [47], and
Huawei Kunpeng [40]. For this transition to happen, applica-
tions written for one architecture must be ported to others.
Binary translators provide an effective solution in porting
applications across these diverse architectures, particularly
in the absence of source code. Given an application binary,
such translators statically generate a binary for the another
ISA ahead of time, or dynamically execute the guest binary on
the new host ISA by emulating the guest architecture. Despite
significant advancements, state-of-the-art binary translators
struggle to (i) tackle the complexities of modern concurrency
primitives, (ii) statically translate certain features without
run time information, and (iii) achieve good performance.
Static Binary Translators (SBTs) [27, 35, 38, 76, 96] offer
performance, but lack completeness as they cannot trans-
late all features ahead-of-time [11], due to the undecidable
nature of static disassembly [74]. In contrast, Dynamic Bi-
nary Translators (DBTs) [37, 72, 85] are complete, but come
with a significant performance penalty due to both runtime
compilation latency and reduced optimization opportunities.
Hybrid systems combine both approaches by dynamically
translating only the instructions that cannot be translated
statically. A hybrid translator could theoretically achieve the
completeness of a DBT with near-SBT performance.
In addition, any translator faces challenges when translat-
ing concurrent programs between ISAs. Architectures such
as x86-64, Armv8, and RISC-V follow different architectural
rules, such as their memory hierarchy and out-of-order ex-
ecution, and consequently, their memory consistency mod-
els differ. The mismatch between the consistency models
may cause incorrect translation of programs, particularly
when translating from a stronger (e.g., x86-64) to a weaker
architecture (e.g., Armv8 or RISC-V). QEMU [72], a state-of-
the-art binary translator, was shown to translate concurrent
programs incorrectly [37], and thus disables concurrency
altogether, severely affecting performance.
Designing a correct hybrid translation system poses sev-
eral challenges: (i) Unifying the Intermediate Representa-
tions (IRs) required for both static and dynamic translation.
Static translation benefits from a high-level representation
for whole-program optimization, while dynamic translation
benefits from low-level details, making their integration
non-trivial. A common base-IR can bridge the gap between
the two abstraction levels. (ii) Ensuring architectural cor-
rectness. Any translator must ensure that the memory se-
mantics of the guest architecture are correctly enforced on
the host architecture, particularly when translating from a
stronger to a weaker architecture. A formally verified map-
ping scheme is necessary to ensure correctness. (iii) Efficient
inter-translation switching. Enabling transitions between
static and dynamic translations, without losing performance,
requires an efficient mapping between original guest code
and the translations. A new hybrid binary format is required
to provide the necessary information at runtime.
To address these challenges, we propose Arancini, an
end-to-end Hybrid Binary Translator (HBT), designed and
implemented from the ground up, for correct and efficient
strong-on-weak binary translation with mixed-size accesses.
Specifically, Arancini employs ArancinIR, our unified
low-level IR to handle challenge (i). ArancinIR is able to re-
tain high-level information for static translation, while also
being able to be transformed quickly into the target IR for
dynamic translation. We address challenge (ii) by formally
defining a weak memory model for ArancinIR, which we
use to derive formally proven correct memory access map-
pings, from the strong guest memory model to the weak
host models. In particular, our mappings correctly translate
mixed-size accesses [5, 33] from x86-64 to ArancinIR to Arm.
We implement those correct mappings in Arancini for both
Arm and RISC-V architectures. Lastly, we address challenge
(iii) by designing a new hybrid binary format which contains
the original guest code, its static translation in the form of
native host code, and metadata to efficiently switch between
static and dynamic translation at runtime.
Challenge (ii) is further complicated by mixed-size ex-
tensions to weak memory models, introducing subtle com-
plexities in program behavior, and thus translation correct-
ness [60, 78]. Prior mapping schemes from x86-64 to Armv8
accompanied by formal proofs [37, 76], did not consider
mixed-size concurrency models. Our proven mapping scheme
from x86-64 to Armv8 addresses this non-trivial challenge,
which required extensive proof mechanization efforts. Ad-
ditionally, translating to RISC-V with mechanized proofs is
a new contribution over earlier works.
We use those new mappings in Arancini with an x86-64
frontend and two backends: Arm and RISC-V. We evaluate
Arancini on the concurrent applications from the Phoenix
benchmark suite [73] and micro-benchmarks on both hosts
across three dimensions: correctness, completeness, and per-
formance. Arancini’s performance closely matches that of
Lasagne [76], a state-of-the-art SBT system, while also achiev-
ing completeness approaching that of a state-of-the-art DBT
like Risotto [37]. Although our design enables Arancini
to be complete like any DBT, we have not currently imple-
mented all features of Risotto and QEMU. Unlike QEMU,
our verified translation rules correctly enforce the x86-64
ordering on Armv8 and RISC-V, even for subtle mixed-size
accesses (on Armv8), while being up to 5× faster than Risotto.
Contributions. We make three foundational contributions:
• We propose the ArancinIR, a unified low-level IR, that
bridges the gap between static and dynamic binary transla-
tion (Section 4), for strong-on-weak emulation. ArancinIR
is designed to closely represent binary-level information
for dynamic translation without sacrificing the ability to
use the high-level representation for static translation.
