Anvil: A General-Purpose Timing-Safe Hardware
Description Language
Jason Zhijingcheng Yu∗
yu.zhi@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Aditya Ranjan Jha∗
arjha@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Umang Mathur
umathur@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Trevor E. Carlson
tcarlson@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Prateek Saxena
prateeks@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Abstract
Expressing hardware designs using hardware description
languages (HDLs) routinely involves using stateless signals
whose values change according to their underlying registers.
Unintended behaviours can arise when the stored values in
these underlying registers are mutated while their depen-
dent signals are expected to remain constant across multiple
cycles. Such timing hazards are common because, with a few
exceptions, existing HDLs lack abstractions for values that
remain unchanged over multiple clock cycles, delegating
this responsibility to hardware designers. Designers must
then carefully decide whether a value should remain un-
changed, sometimes even across hardware modules. This
paper proposes Anvil, an HDL which statically prevents tim-
ing hazards with a novel type system. Anvil is the only HDL
we know of that guarantees timing safety, i.e., absence of
timing hazards, without sacrificing expressiveness for cycle-
level timing control or dynamic timing behaviours. Unlike
many HLS languages that abstract away the differences be-
tween registers and signals, Anvil’s type system exposes
them fully while capturing the timing relationships between
register value mutations and signal usages to enforce timing
safety. This, in turn, enables safe composition of communi-
cating hardware modules by static enforcement of timing
contracts that encode timing constraints on shared signals.
Such timing contracts can be specified parametric on abstract
time points that can vary during run-time, allowing the type
system to statically express dynamic timing behaviour. We
have implemented Anvil and successfully used it to imple-
ment key timing-sensitive modules, comparing them against
open-source SystemVerilog counterparts to demonstrate the
practicality and expressiveness of the generated hardware.
1 Introduction
Hardware description languages (HDLs) shape the way peo-
ple think about and describe hardware designs. Ideally, an
HDL should provide easy-to-use abstractions for hardware
designers to express their intention precisely and correctly.
∗Equal contribution.
The concurrent and continuous behaviour of hardware makes
this goal challenging to achieve.
Unlike software programs, where values are all persistent
(stored either in registers or in memory), hardware designs
involve separate notions of signals and registers. While a reg-
ister can store persistent values and be assigned new values
every cycle, signals are stateless, with their values changing
with the registers they depend on. If the hardware designer
expects a signal to remain unchanged across multiple cy-
cles, they must explicitly ensure the stored values of their
underlying registers do not change. The incorrect timing of
register mutation (i.e., change of the stored value in a regis-
ter) and signal use thus easily introduces invalid or wrong
values during run-time, and may even expose the hardware
design to time-of-check-to-time-of-use (TOCTOU) attacks.
We call such problems timing hazards. The problem of timing
hazards is further exacerbated by the concurrent nature of
hardware designs: A hardware design commonly consists of
large numbers of modules which are executing in parallel
and communicating with each other via shared signals.
Most existing HDLs such as SystemVerilog [8], VHDL [7],
and Chisel [14] do not catch timing hazards at compile time,
leaving designers to discover these issues only during simu-
lation. Designers frequently seek help on discussion forums
simply to pinpoint the origins of the errors [18, 21, 48]. Tim-
ing hazards are prevalent even among experienced designers
and in widely used open-source hardware components, as is
shown by several real-world examples given in Appendix B.
A principled way to eliminate timing hazards is to forbid
them in the HDL itself. We call such an HDL that only allows
designs without timing hazards timing-safe. The key chal-
lenge to achieve timing safety while also providing enough
expressiveness for writing general-purpose hardware de-
signs. Some existing HDLs can provide timing safety but only
at a significant cost of expressiveness, making them only
suitable for specific applications. For example, high-level
synthesis (HLS) languages [5, 10, 13] offer software-like pro-
gramming models for hardware design. In these languages,
timing hazards are not a concern because they abstract away
1
arXiv:2503.19447v2
[cs.AR]
27
Oct
2025
both cycle latencies and the distinction between wires and
registers, effectively treating all values as persistent, similar
to variables in software programming. This expressiveness
for cycle-level control and wires is, unfortunately, absent in
such languages. This is an essential abstraction in general-
purpose hardware designs, especially where performance is
a priority. Consequently, the applicability of HLS languages
is commonly limited to speeding up algorithms with pro-
grammable hardware (e.g., FPGA). Other timing-safe lan-
guages focus only on specific types of hardware designs,
such as CPU stages [50] and static pipelines [38, 46].
We present Anvil, the first HDL we know of that guaran-
tees timing safety while maintaining expressiveness
for general-purpose hardware design use cases. Anvil
is general-purpose in the sense that the designer retains full
control of the cycle-level timing and register states in RTL,
unlike HLS languages, and is not limited to design use cases
such as CPU-level abstractions and static pipelines. In par-
ticular, it allows hardware designers to seamlessly specify
cycle-level delays and to express whether a value is stored
in a register. It also supports expressing hardware designs
with dynamic timing behaviours easily.
Anvil achieves timing safety statically with a novel type
system which captures the timing relationships between
register mutations and use of signals. It performs type check-
ing that reasons about whether each use of signal takes
place in a time window throughout which it carries an un-
changing and meaningful value, and rejects code that is not
timing-safe. Designs written in Anvil can thus specify precise
cycle-level behaviour and register updates. This is in con-
trast to HLS languages [5] that hide wires and cycles beneath
their abstractions. Across hardware modules, Anvil’s type
system guarantees safe composition by statically checking
against timing contracts, which specify constraints regarding
communicated signals, including constraints about when
such signals must be kept unchanged. Although Anvil’s type
checking is entirely static, it explicitly allows dynamic timing
behaviours, i.e., the number of cycles for a behaviour of the
hardware design can vary during run-time (e.g., caches). The
type system achieves this by capturing time not in terms of
an absolute (fixed) number of cycles, but instead as abstract
time points that correspond to events that may occur arbitrar-
ily late, for example, the event corresponding to the receipt of
data from another module. This is in sharp contrast to recent
work [38] in which the proposed type system only allows
expressing designs with fixed static timing behaviours.
We have implemented Anvil (Section 6). The Anvil com-
piler performs type checking and compiles Anvil code to
SystemVerilog. Our evaluations highlight the expressive-
ness and practicality of Anvil (Section 7). Designs written
in Anvil can be integrated in existing code bases in other
HDLs, thus allowing incremental adoption and making Anvil
immediately useful. We have successfully used Anvil to im-
plement a diverse set of 10 latency-sensitive components
module Memory (
...
input [7:0] inp,
input req,
output [7:0] out
);
sig req
Clock
Module Top
address = 0x00
every clock cycle:
req = ~req
if req == 1:
inp = (address++)
else:
print(out)
Memory
0x00 Val 0
0x01 Val 1
0x02 Val 2
0x03 Val 3
..........
0xFF Val 255
sig[8] inp
sig[8] out
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
clk
req
input 0x00 0x01 0x02 0x03 0x04
output Val 0 Val 2
expected Val 0 Val 1 Val 2 Val 3
e1 e2 e3 e4 e5 e6 e7
0 1 2 3
clk
req
input 0x00
output Val 0
[T, T+2)
[T+2, T+3)
Figure 1. Module Top interfaced with Memory.
ranging from an AES accelerator [1] to a page table walker
in a RISC-V CPU [51]. Despite the Anvil compiler being an
early-stage prototype, when compared with open-source
SystemVerilog implementations, the Anvil implementations
show practical overhead averaging 4.50% for area and 3.75%
for power. We have made Anvil open-source for public use
at https://github.com/jasonyu1996/anvil.
Our Contributions. We introduce Anvil, an HDL with a
novel type system that guarantees timing safety without
sacrificing expressiveness, e.g., for cycle-level control and dy-
namic timing behaviours. Anvil allows for general-purpose
hardware design use cases and integration with existing
SystemVerilog projects.
2 Motivation
The motivation of our work stems from the susceptibility of
RTL designs to timing hazards due to limitations of de facto
standard HDL abstractions.
2.1 Example of a Timing Hazard
Consider the interface of a memory module in SystemVerilog
in Figure 1 top left. Unlike software, hardware modules com-
municate using signals that can be continuously read and
updated. Consider an interfacing hardware module (Figure 1,
top right), Top, which reads a value from a memory module
with the same interface. The implementation of Top sends
an address as a request and expects to read the output in the
following cycle. However, the circuit outputs are incorrect, as
evident when the system is simulated (Figure 1, bottom left).
The culprit is an unexpected timing delay. The module Top
is written under the assumption that the memory subsystem
responds precisely one clock cycle after the req signal is set.
However, the memory subsystem takes two cycles to process
the lookup request and return the output.
In more detail, the module Top requests address 0x00 by
setting the req signal high during cycle [0, 1). It expects the
output in the next cycle, but the memory has not finished
2
