MoDM: Efficient Serving for Image Generation via
Mixture-of-Diffusion Models
Yuchen Xia1, Divyam Sharma1, Yichao Yuan1, Souvik Kundu2, and Nishil Talati1
1University of Michigan, USA; 2Intel Labs, USA
Abstract
Diffusion-based text-to-image generation models trade la-
tency for quality: small models are fast but generate lower
quality images, while large models produce better images
but are slow. We present MoDM, a novel caching-based serv-
ing system for diffusion models that dynamically balances
latency and quality through a mixture of diffusion models.
Unlike prior approaches that rely on model-specific inter-
nal features, MoDM caches final images, allowing seamless
retrieval and reuse across multiple diffusion model families.
This design enables adaptive serving by dynamically bal-
ancing latency and image quality: using smaller models for
cache-hit requests to reduce latency while reserving larger
models for cache-miss requests to maintain quality. Small
model image quality is preserved using retrieved cached im-
ages. We design a global monitor that optimally allocates
GPU resources and balances inference workload, ensuring
high throughput while meeting Service-Level Objectives
(SLOs) under varying request rates. Our evaluations show
that MoDM significantly reduces an average serving time by
2.5× while retaining image quality, making it a practical so-
lution for scalable and resource-efficient model deployment.
1 Introduction
Diffusion models have revolutionized text-to-image gener-
ation, enabling the creation of high-quality, photorealistic
images from natural language descriptions. Their success
has made them a cornerstone of AI-driven creative tools,
powering applications in digital art, content generation, and
interactive media. The demand for diffusion models is at
an all-time high. Adobe’s Firefly service [1] has generated
over 2 billion images, while OpenAI’s DALL-E 2 [2] has seen
similar adoption, alongside an exponential rise in prompt
submissions to Stable Diffusion systems, as shown by Diffu-
sionDB [3]. However, each diffusion model inference takes
10s of seconds, making it a computationally expensive task.
Meeting this growing demand requires significant improve-
ments in serving system throughput and latency.
An effective way to improve diffusion model performance
is through caching, which reduces redundant computations
and accelerates inference. Prior works have explored various
caching techniques [4–11], including latent caching (storing
intermediate noisy features), feature caching (storing acti-
vations), and image patch caching. While these techniques
enhance performance, caching intermediate features has two
Large
Model
Prompt Image
Small
Model
Prompt Image
High Image Quality
Long Latency
Low Image Quality
Short Latency
Large
Model
Latent Feat
Cache
Prompt
Cache Miss: T De-noising Steps
<T Denoising
Steps
Image
High Image Quality
0.8 * Long Latency (Limited Benefit)
Baseline
Prior Work (NIRVANA)
Large
Model
Small
Model
Prompt
Image
Cache
Image
<T De-noising
Steps
Cache Hit
Cache Hit
High Quality
Short Latency
MoDM
(This Work)
Cache Miss: T De-noising Steps
Figure 1. Overview of MoDM that balances between high
image quality and short latency using a mixture of models.
major limitations. First, it restricts serving to a single model,
as cached content is model-specific. Second, relying on just
one model limits the potential performance gains, reducing
flexibility in optimizing inference.
In this paper, we introduce MoDM, an efficient serving
system for text-to-image generation using a mixture of diffu-
sion models. While our work is based on the general idea of
caching, MoDM is uniquely designed to achieve three design
goals. (1) Diffusion models trade off inference latency and
image quality: large models generate high-quality images
but are slow, while smaller models are faster but sacrifice
quality. MoDM dynamically exploits this trade-off by design-
ing a caching strategy compatible with multiple models to
optimize both speed and quality. (2) To maintain high-quality
image generation, MoDM implements an advanced retrieval
strategy that ensures retrieved cached content closely aligns
with new prompts. (3) Finally, MoDM introduces an adaptive
serving system that dynamically balances latency and quality
based on request rates and system load, ensuring efficient
and scalable performance.
Fig. 1 shows the design overview of MoDM. To ensure
that the cache content is accessible and relevant for multi-
ple models, we propose to cache final generated images in
the past, in contrast to caching latent intermediate images
in prior work [6]. When a new prompt closely matches a
cached image, MoDM retrieves the image, applies controlled
noise, and refines it using a smaller model. This approach
preserves the quality of the cached image while benefiting
from the lower latency of the smaller model. Requests that
1
arXiv:2503.11972v2
[cs.DC]
2
Aug
2025
miss the cache are processed using a large model. This hy-
brid approach effectively balances latency and image quality
by using a mixture of models.
Caching final images enables retrieval based on text-to-
image similarity, unlike prior works [6] that rely solely on
text-to-text similarity by caching intermediate features. Lever-
aging the CLIP score [12] and image generation examples,
we demonstrate that text-to-image similarity retrieval bet-
ter aligns with user prompts, using it for cache retrieval in
MoDM. Building on this, MoDM integrates image caching
and a mixture of models into a high-performance diffusion
model serving system. The system features a Request Sched-
uler that manages incoming requests, categorizes them into
cache hits and misses, retrieves cached images, and main-
tains cache content over time. Additionally, a Global Monitor
analyzes request rates and cache hit/miss distributions to
dynamically allocate GPU resources, scheduling different
models for inference based on workload conditions.
We evaluate the effectiveness of MoDM using both perfor-
mance (i.e., throughput and tail latency) and image quality
(i.e., CLIP [12] and FID [13] scores) metrics. Using the Diffu-
sionDB [3] dataset, we demonstrate that MoDM achieves a
2.5× improvement in inference throughput and 46.7% lower
energy consumption, compared to using only a high-quality
model, by leveraging Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large as a high-
quality model and Stable Diffusion-XL as a low-latency model.
Additionally, we evaluate tail latency under varying request
rates, showing that MoDM sustains significantly higher loads
without violating Service Level Objectives (SLOs), outper-
forming state-of-the-art solutions. Finally, we highlight the
versatility of MoDM by serving requests across different
model families, including Stable Diffusion [14] and SANA [15].
Unlike SANA that statically reduce inference cost by design-
ing smaller models, MoDM introduces a novel technique that
can intelligently and dynamically balance latency and
quality by leveraging a mixture of diffusion models.
The contributions of MoDM are as follows.
• An optimized cache design and retrieval policy based on
final images to accelerate diffusion model inference.
• Generating images by retrieving a cached image, adding
noise, and de-noising it with a low-cost model.
• A hybrid serving approach that leverages small and large
models to balance latency and image quality.
• MoDM: an end-to-end text-to-image serving system de-
sign that dynamically adjusts to load variations, achieving
2.5× performance improvement.
2 Background on Diffusion Model Serving
2.1 Diffusion Models
Diffusion models [15–17] generate text-prompted images
from noise via an iterative de-noising mechanism. These
models employ a forward process adds noise over 𝑇 steps,
and a reverse process de-noises the image iteratively. Each
de-noising step involves passing the latent representation
through the full model, which is computationally expensive,
with a typical inference requiring 50 steps [6].
This makes diffusion models slower than non-iterative
models like GAN [18] or VAE [19], presenting challenges for
real-time and high-throughput applications. Diffusion mod-
els are evaluated using several metrics: the Frechet Inception
Distance (FID) score [13], which measures image realism
and fidelity by comparing generated images to real ones; the
CLIPScore [12], which quantifies the alignment between
generated images and their corresponding text prompts;
the PickScore [20], which leverages a preference-tuned lan-
guage–vision model to better reflect human judgment of
image–text compatibility; and the Inception Score (IS) [21],
which evaluates the quality and diversity of generated im-
ages based on the confidence and entropy of class predictions
from an Inception network. Diffusion models vary in size,
with larger models like Stable Diffusion 3.5-Large [14] and
Imagen 3 [22] offering high-quality, detailed images at the
cost of longer inference times, while smaller models like
Stable Diffusion XL [23] and SANA [15] prioritize speed but
sacrifice image fidelity. While previous studies suggest that
high-quality image generation requires a large model [6, 14],
our work challenges this by using a mixture of small and
large models to optimally balance latency and quality.
2.2 Caching to Improve Serving Performance
To reduce the computational overhead of iterative de-noising
in diffusion models, several prior works [4–11] optimize in-
ference based on prompt similarities. One notable approach,
Nirvana [6], introduces an approximate caching mechanism
that stores intermediate latent representations from previ-
ous images. When a new prompt closely matches a cached
prompt, Nirvana retrieves the cached representation and
skips several de-noising steps, improving latency. The system
caches multiple latent representations to enable flexibility in
retrieval, using larger values of 𝑘 for highly similar prompts.
Nirvana uses text-to-text similarity to guide the retrieval
process, comparing the current prompt’s text embedding
with cached ones to select the most relevant intermediate
representation. This approach reduces inference latency by
up to 20% while maintaining image quality.
3 Challenges of Mixture-of-Models Design
This section explores the challenges and opportunities of
using a model mixture to balance the latency-quality trade-
off and addresses key research questions for designing an
effective caching-based serving system. (1) How can we de-
sign a cache that minimizes space usage while being model
agnostic? (2) How can we efficiently retrieve cached items
to ensure optimal quality of image generation? (3) How can
we best balance high image generation quality with low
inference latency?
2
0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40
CLIPScore
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Normalized
Frequency
mean=0.28
mean=0.22
text-to-text
text-to-image
12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28
PickScore
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Normalized
Frequency
mean=20.33
mean=19.52
text-to-text
text-to-image
Figure 2. Comparison of CLIPScore and PickScore distribu-
tions for retrievals based on text-to-text and text-to-image
similarity. Higher is better for both scores.
3.1 What to Cache?
Prior work [6] has used latent caching, storing multiple in-
termediate representations to speed up diffusion model in-
ference. However, it has two main drawbacks: significant
storage overhead, with 2.5MB per image due to the need to
store multiple latent intermediates (using Stable Diffusion-
3.5-Large as an example), compared to 1.4MB for storing
only the final image; and model dependence, as latents from
one model are incompatible with other models, leading to
cache fragmentation and scalability issues in multi-model
environments. An alternative is to cache full images, which
are universally interpretable and model-independent, simpli-
fying cache management and reducing storage costs. This
approach eliminates the need for separate latent caches, uti-
lizes compressed formats like PNG and JPEG, and allows the
dynamic reintroduction of noise to reconstruct intermediate
states, enabling compatibility across different models and
improving scalability in large-scale serving systems.
Insight: Caching full images reduces storage overhead,
eliminates model dependency, and enables broad reuse
across different diffusion models.
3.2 How to Retrieve Cached Items?
Existing caching methods [6] use text-to-text similarity for
cache retrieval, which often leads to incorrect matches due
to a lack of visual alignment. These methods focus on text
embeddings, which do not guarantee that the retrieved image
accurately reflects the user’s intent. Additionally, since prior
New prompt: Last selfies on earth apocalypse
Retrieved prompt:
Crazy cat selfie photo
Generated image
for new prompt
(prior work)
Text-to-Text Similarity (Undesired)
Retrieved prompt:
A lone human witnessing a
nuclear explosion in the
background, horror atmosphere
Generated image
for new prompt
(our approach)
Text-to-Image Similarity (Desired)
Text-to-Text Similarity (Undesired)
New prompt: A garden that can grow from weeds in watercolor style
Retrieved prompt:
Watercolor botanical pattern
Generated image
for new prompt
(prior work)
Text-to-Image Similarity (Desired)
Retrieved prompt:
A large garden with growing
flowers and vegetables in the
sun illustration style
Generated image
for new prompt
(our approach)
Figure 3. Comparison of image quality using a cached image
retrieved through text-to-text and text-to-image similarity.
approaches cache only latent representations rather than
full images, they cannot leverage text-to-image similarity,
further reducing retrieval precision.
Image caching enables retrieval based on text-to-image
similarity, significantly improving alignment with the user’s
request in terms of style, structure, and content. By using
CLIP embeddings or similar cross-modal techniques, the
system ensures better visual relevance. As shown in Fig. 2,
text-to-image retrieval results in higher CLIPScore compared
to text-to-text retrieval, indicating stronger visual alignment
between the retrieved image and the new request text. To
address potential bias from using CLIP for both retrieval
and evaluation, we also report PickScore, which similarly
favors text-to-image retrieval. Fig. 3 highlights cases where
text similarity does not align well visually, underscoring the
importance of cross-modal retrieval for effective caching.
Insight: Text-to-image similarity-based retrieval is
superior to text-to-text similarity because it ensures
better visual alignment with user intent.
3.3 How to Balance Between Latency and Quality?
Using a single diffusion model for inference fails to effectively
balance the latency-quality trade-off. In Nirvana, despite a
large cache of 1.5 million latents and a cache hit rate over 90%,
the system only achieves a 20% reduction in computation,
remaining vulnerable to high request bursts and frequent
SLO violations (more details in §7.2). To address this, cache-
hit requests can be offloaded to a smaller diffusion model,
as recent studies suggest that minor refinements can be effi-
ciently handled by lightweight models [24, 25]. Research on
diffusion dynamics [26, 27] shows that early de-noising steps
determine structure, while later steps focus on fine details,
enabling smaller models to handle cache-hit requests with
minimal quality loss. Comparing large and small models re-
veals that adaptive model selection can reduce computation
3
time while maintaining acceptable quality, offering a promis-
ing approach for real-world serving systems. Here, a large
model refers to one like Stable Diffusion-3.5-large, while a
small model refers to one like SANA.
Insight: Using a mixture of small and large diffusion
models optimizes the latency-quality trade-off, ensur-
ing efficient computation while maintaining high im-
age quality.
4 MoDM Design Overview
This section provides the design goals and overview of the
MoDM serving system.
4.1 Design Goals
MoDM addresses the challenges of serving diffusion model
inference workload with the following Design Goals (DG).
DG#1: Dynamically Balancing Latency and Quality.
Building on the trade-off discussed in §2.1, our goal is to
achieve inference latency close to a small diffusion model
while preserving the image quality of a large model. MoDM
accomplishes this by strategically leveraging both small and
large models for serving. Unlike prior works that either stati-
cally reduce inference costs by designing new models [15] or
achieve limited gains by skipping a few de-noising steps [6],
MoDM strives to dynamically optimize the latency-quality
trade-off.
DG#2: Compatibility with Multiple Models. Differ-
ent diffusion models and model families (e.g., Stable Diffu-
sion and SANA) offer distinct trade-offs in terms of latency,
quality, and architectural optimizations. Relying on a single
model family limits flexibility and may lead to suboptimal
performance across diverse request rates. Our design goal is
to enable seamless serving across multiple model families,
allowing the system to dynamically select the best model for
different requests based on latency considerations.
DG#3: Optimized Cache Design and Retrieval. Our
caching mechanism is designed to maximize efficiency while
maintaining broad compatibility. The key goals include (1)
achieving a high cache hit rate with minimal storage over-
head, (2) ensuring cached items remain usable across multi-
ple models (DG#2), (3) implementing cache management to
prevent over-representation of specific items in future gener-
ations, and (4) adopting an accurate retrieval that effectively
matches new prompts with cached items.
DG#4: Adaptability to Varying Request Rates. Re-
quest rates fluctuate over time [3, 6], posing challenges for
maintaining efficient serving performance. Our system is
designed to dynamically adapt to these variations by selec-
tively utilizing different models, ensuring an optimal balance
between quality and latency under varying workloads.
Input: Prompt
Cache Retrieval
Cache Maintenance
Request Router
Request
Scheduler
Image
Cache
Cache Miss
Queue
Cache Hit
Queue
Stats Collector
PID Controller
Global
Monitor
Request
Rates,
Cache Hit
Rates
Model
Allocation
Generated
Image
New image to cache
User
Output:
Image
Mixture of Diffusion Models
GPU Workers
…
E.g.,
Stable
diffusion,
SANA
…
Retrieval,
Maintenance
Figure 4. Overview of MoDM system design.
4.2 System Design Overview
Fig. 4 presents an overview of the MoDM system architec-
ture, highlighting its key design components. The system
takes a text-based user prompt as input and generates an
image as output. To optimize real-time text-to-image gener-
ation with diffusion models, our approach integrates cache-
aware request scheduling and dynamic model selection.
The Request Scheduler manages the flow of incoming
image generation requests, ensuring efficient resource utiliza-
tion. Upon receiving a request, it generates a text embedding
using a CLIP model hosted by the scheduler. This embed-
ding is then analyzed to determine if a cached image closely
matches the request, as detailed in §5.2. If a sufficiently close
match is found, the scheduler retrieves the cached image, en-
abling content reuse and reducing computational overhead.
For cache-hit requests, the scheduler dynamically adjusts
the number of de-noising steps based on the text-to-image
similarity score, resuming the generation process from a
later stage with lower computation. If no suitable cached
image is identified, the request is marked as a cache miss
and undergoes full inference.
To meet DG#1 and optimize throughput, an underlying
design principle in MoDM is to serve cache-hit requests
with a small model (more details in §5.1), which reduces
latency while maintaining the quality of the generated image
through cached content. Cache-miss requests are handled
by a larger model, ensuring high image generation quality
with full inference from scratch. The scheduler directs each
request to the appropriate queue: cache-hit requests go to
the cache hit queue, where a refined image is generated with
fewer diffusion steps, while cache-miss requests are sent
to the cache miss queue for full synthesis. Additionally, to
meet DG#3, the scheduler manages the cache by storing
newly generated images and removing older ones, ensuring
efficient memory usage and maintaining content diversity.
The Global Monitor continuously tracks request pat-
terns and system load in real time, leveraging data from
the request scheduler to optimize model allocation across
4
Table 1. Notations used in this design.
Symbol Description
𝐻cache Cache hit rate in the last monitoring period.
𝑇 Total de-noising steps
𝐾 Number of de-noising steps skipped
𝑃 (𝐾 = 𝑘) Fraction of cache-hit requests assigned to refinement step 𝑘
𝑅 Recorded request rate in the last monitoring period
(requests per minute).
𝑊hit Cache-hit workload.
𝑊miss Cache-miss workload.
𝑁 Total number of GPU workers.
𝑃small Profiled throughput of the small model
(requests per minute per GPU).
𝑃large Profiled throughput of the large model
(requests per minute per GPU).
𝑁small Number of allocated small models.
𝑁large Number of allocated large models.
𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑 PID tuning parameters for dynamic resource allocation.
GPU workers. To meet DG#4, a PID (Proportional-Integral-
Derivative) controller dynamically adjusts GPU allocation
based on key metrics such as request rate, cache hit rate,
and de-noising step distribution. The system strategically
balances between model variants, with larger models han-
dling full inference for high-quality outputs and refinements,
while smaller models focus solely on efficient refinements
of cached images. By adapting to workload fluctuations, the
global monitor ensures optimal resource distribution, pre-
venting resource underutilization while maintaining quality.
These design details are discussed in §5.3.
The Workers execute image generation tasks in parallel
across multiple GPUs, each hosting a model variant based on
the global monitor’s allocation and dynamically switching
models as needed. While workers running larger models
are capable of handling both cache-hit and cache-miss re-
quests, they prioritize cache-miss requests, as these require
full inference across all denoising steps and therefore incur
significantly higher latency. In contrast, workers running
smaller models exclusively process cache-hit requests, focus-
ing on efficient refinement to minimize system-wide latency.
This dynamic task assignment and model switching strategy
ensures optimal GPU utilization, maintaining high through-
put while balancing the image generation quality to meet
DG#1 and DG#2.
5 MoDM Design Details
In this section, we present the detailed design of MoDM, ad-
dressing four key research questions. (1) How to use cached
images for generation by applying a subset of de-noising
steps with a small model? (2) How to effectively retrieve
items from the cache and determine the optimal number of
de-noising steps for a given prompt? (3) What is the role of
the global monitor in managing GPU resources and model
allocation to optimize efficiency under varying load condi-
tions? (4) How does the request scheduler manage the image
cache to ensure efficient system performance? The notations
used in this section are explained in Table 1.
5.1 Generation using Cached Image with Reduced
De-Noising Steps
Upon receiving a request, the request scheduler uses the
prompt embedding to check for a sufficiently similar image
in the cache. If a match is found, MoDM retrieves the image,
adds noise to it by a pre-determined amount, and finally uses
a diffusion model to de-noise the image for the given prompt.
The key idea is to augment with sufficient noise to generate
a new image, enabling the system to skip de-noising steps.
Given a query embedding 𝑞, the system retrieves the most
relevant cached image by computing the cosine similarity
between the query embedding and cached image embeddings
(following §3.2). The similarity score is defined as:
𝑆(𝑞, 𝐼∗
) =
𝑞 · 𝑒𝐼∗
∥𝑞∥∥𝑒𝐼∗ ∥
(1)
where 𝑒𝐼∗ is the embedding of the cached image 𝐼∗, ex-
tracted using a pretrained CLIP image encoder. Retrieval
is performed only if the similarity score 𝑆(𝑞, 𝐼∗) exceeds a
predefined threshold 𝜏, which is treated as a hyperparame-
ter controlling the trade-off between retrieval precision and
recall. Rather than using the retrieved image directly, the
system reintroduces noise using the same scaling method
as image-to-image diffusion, enabling the image to re-enter
the de-noising process at an intermediate timestep. This ap-
proach allows for refinement of the retrieved image, ensuring
better alignment with the request while preserving computa-
tional efficiency. Given a target timestep 𝑡𝑘, the noisy image
˜
𝐼 is generated using the diffusion model’s noise schedule:
˜
𝐼 = 𝜎𝑡𝑘 · 𝜖 + (1 − 𝜎𝑡𝑘 ) · 𝐼∗
, (2)
where 𝜎𝑡𝑘 is the noise scaling factor retrieved from the dif-
fusion model’s noise schedule sigmas[𝑡𝑘], 𝜖 ∼ N (0, 𝐼) is
Gaussian noise sampled from a standard normal distribution,
and 𝐼∗ is the retrieved image.
The system then runs the diffusion model for the remain-
ing 𝑇 − 𝑘 steps, skipping the initial 𝑘 de-noising iterations.
This step refines the retrieved image to match the new re-
quest. Since the retrieved image shares high-level features
with the target, running only the later de-noising steps al-
lows controlled adjustments to colors, textures, and details
without regenerating the image from scratch. By avoiding
redundant computation, this method significantly reduces
inference cost while preserving high image fidelity.
The choice of 𝑘 is determined dynamically based on the
similarity between the retrieved image and the new request
(§5.2). A higher similarity score indicates that the retrieved
image closely matches the new prompt, requiring fewer mod-
ifications to align with the desired output. In such cases, a
larger 𝑘 is selected to skip more de-noising steps and reduce
latency. Conversely, for lower similarity, a smaller 𝑘 is used
to allow more iterative refinement.
With 𝐻cache to be the cache hit rate with 𝐶gen denoting the
total compute cost for generating a new image from scratch
5
using the large model. Each request requires a total of 𝑇
de-noising steps with cache hits only requiring 𝑇 − 𝑘 steps.
The computation saved per cache-hit request, weighted by
the distribution of different diffusion steps 𝐾, is:
𝐶saved = 𝐻cache
𝑇
∑︁
𝑘=0
𝑘
𝑇
𝐶gen𝑃(𝐾 = 𝑘). (3)
Instead of running the large model for refinement, our
system can offload cache-hit refinements to a smaller model,
which performs the remaining 𝑇 − 𝑘 steps at a significantly
lower cost. Let 𝐶small denote the compute cost of the small
model per step relative to the large model. The total compute
savings, considering the distribution of 𝐾, is:
𝐶total_saved = 𝐻cache
Í𝑇
𝑘=0 𝑃(𝐾 = 𝑘)

𝑘
𝑇 𝐶gen + 𝑇 −𝑘
𝑇 (𝐶gen − 𝐶small)

.
(4)
Since the small model also performs only the remaining
𝑇 − 𝑘 steps, its impact on total compute savings depends on
how much cheaper each step is relative to the large model.
The larger the gap between 𝐶gen and 𝐶small, the greater the
additional efficiency gained by refinement offloading.
5.2 Cache Retrieval and 𝑘 Selection
Since our system caches full images rather than latents, we
can generate intermediate states for any 𝑘 by applying con-
trolled noise to the cached image. To balance computational
efficiency and generation diversity, we restrict 𝑘 to choose
from a discrete set of N values (where 𝑁 = 6 in our case),
K = {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30} . This selection ensures efficient
refinement while covering a sufficient range of de-noising
steps to maintain high-quality generation. Given that a full
generation requires (𝑇 = 50) de-noising steps, we cap 𝑘 at
30 to prevent excessive similarity between refined outputs
while still achieving significant computational savings.
To ensure that cached image refinements maintain a suffi-
ciently high level of quality, MoDM follows a quality-constrained
retrieval policy. Specifically, we enforce that the quality of
an image generated from a retrieved cached image using a
small model must be at least 𝛼 times the quality of an image
generated from scratch using a large model, where 𝛼 ≤ 1
is the quality degradation factor controlling the allowable
trade-off between efficiency and output fidelity:
𝑄cache-hit(𝑘) ≥ 𝛼 · 𝑄full-gen. (5)
We conduct an empirical evaluation to determine appro-
priate cache hit thresholds 𝜏 and 𝑘 selection values. We gen-
erate 10000 images from DiffusionDB [3] using a large model
and then performed refinements starting at different 𝑘 steps
(𝑘 ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30}), selecting the most semantically
aligned cached image from a cache of 100000 stored images.
We set a strict quality constraint of 𝛼 = 0.95. While this
analysis is inspired by prior work [6], the key difference is
0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34
Text-Image Similarity
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
0.95
Quality
Factor
k = 5
k = 10
k = 15
k = 20
k = 25
k = 30
(a)
def k_decision(similarity):
if similarity >= 0.25:
k = 5
else-if similarity >= 0.27:
k = 10
else-if similarity >= 0.28:
k = 15
else-if similarity >= 0.29:
k = 25
else-if similarity >= 0.3:
k = 30
return k
(b)
Figure 5. (a) Relationship between final image quality and
text-image similarity across different 𝑘, (b) logic for deter-
mining 𝑘 based on text-to-image similarity.
that we rely on text-to-image similarity for retrieval based
on §3.2 instead of earlier text-to-text similarity attempt.
We present a detailed analysis of these results in Fig. 5a,
illustrating the relationship between the similarity score be-
tween the query and retrieved image, the selected 𝑘, and the
final image quality. For a fixed 𝑘, as the text-image similarity
increases, the final image quality also improves. Furthermore,
for the same text-image similarity, a smaller 𝑘 involves more
refinement to the retrieved image, resulting in higher final
image quality but lower computational savings. A quality
factor greater than 1 is observed when the retrieved images
closely align with the new prompt (i.e., exhibits high text-
to-image similarity). In such cases, even partial refinement
using a smaller model can further enhances image quality.
The figure also marks the quality degradation parameter 𝛼,
and for each 𝑘, we determine the lowest possible text-image
similarity that ensures the final image quality remains above
𝛼, using this value as the cache hit threshold for that spe-
cific 𝑘. Fig. 5b presents the decision process for determining
𝑘 based on similarity. This ensures that MoDM maximizes
computational savings while maintaining the required image
quality.
Cache Threshold Selection. MoDM utilizes text-to-image
similarity (CLIPScore) to achieve higher cache utilization
while maintaining a stringent quality factor (𝛼 ≥ 0.95) com-
pared to Nirvana’s text-to-text similarity-based method for
(𝛼 ≥ 0.90). Although Nirvana applies high thresholds (0.65-
0.95) on text-to-text similarity, this measure does not directly
account for the perceptual fidelity between the input prompt
and generated images. In contrast, CLIP scores explicitly cap-
ture semantic alignment between text and images, providing
a more accurate representation of the final visual output’s
relevance to the user’s query. Consequently, even with lower
numerical thresholds (from 0.25 to 0.3), MoDM achieves
better cache utilization by targeting semantically similar
images, better matching the user’s intent. We evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed threshold heuristic (Fig. 5b) by
randomly sampling a new set of 1,000 prompts, distinct from
those used during training the heuristic, that result in cache
hits. For each prompt, we use our heuristic to determine
the number of denoising steps, generate the corresponding
6
image, and assess its quality using the CLIP score. On av-
erage, the heuristic-guided images achieve a CLIP score of
28.50, compared to 28.59 from the full large-model pipeline,
corresponding to 99.7% of the baseline quality. This not only
surpasses our target of 95% quality retention but also demon-
strates that our method can significantly reduce the number
of denoising iterations, and hence inference cost—with mini-
mal loss in perceptual fidelity.
Performance of Cache Retrieval. MoDM performs text-
to-image similarity computations on the GPU with minimal
overhead. First, image embeddings require very little mem-
ory: storing 100000 image embeddings consumes just 0.29
GB. Second, cosine similarity computation is highly opti-
mized for GPUs, as it involves element-wise normalization
and matrix multiplication, both of which are efficient opera-
tions. The latency of cache retrieval, therefore, is negligible,
taking only 0.05 seconds for 100000 cached images, whereas
the de-noising process takes over 10 seconds. This ensures
that similarity checks remain lightweight and do not become
a bottleneck in cache retrieval.
5.3 Resource Management using Global Monitor
A large-scale serving framework must leverage multiple
GPUs to efficiently handle high request volumes. Since dif-
fusion models are computationally intensive, a single model
running on a single GPU would quickly become a bottleneck
under heavy workloads. To achieve high throughput, a serv-
ing system distributes requests across multiple GPUs, allow-
ing concurrent execution of multiple inference tasks. MoDM
introduces a mixture-of-models design to balance latency
and image quality. This necessitates a resource management
system that efficiently allocates GPU workers between large
and small models to balance request throughput, latency,
and quality. In specific we present two operational modes.
• Quality-Optimized Mode: MoDM aims to meet the re-
quest rate while maintaining the highest image quality.
• Throughput-Optimized Mode: MoDM maximizes through-
put, ensuring the highest number of processed requests
while still maintaining acceptable image quality.
5.3.1 Quality-Optimized Mode. In this mode, the re-
source management system dynamically allocates available
GPU workers between large and small models to (1) meet the
request rate requirement and (2) maintain image quality as
high as possible. The system determines the optimal number
of large 𝑁large and small 𝑁small models based on real-time
metrics such as the cache hit rate, the distribution of cache-
hit refinement steps 𝑘, and the request rate 𝑅. Each GPU (a
worker) can only host one model at a time, imposing
𝑁large + 𝑁small ≤ 𝑁 . (6)
The system must also satisfy the following constraints to
ensure compliance with the latency objectives.
Cache Miss Throughput Constraint. Since cache-miss
requests require full image generation and can only be pro-
cessed by large models, the aggregate throughput of all large
models must be at least the workload required to process
cache miss requests at a given request rate.
𝑁large𝑃large ≥ 𝑊miss = (1 − 𝐻cache)𝑅. (7)
Cache Hit Throughput Constraint. Cache hit requests
are processed using either a large or a small model; the
amount of work depends on the selected refinement step 𝑘.
The effective workload for cache hit requests depends on the
portion of requests assigned to different 𝑘-values:
𝑊hit = 𝐻cache𝑅
∑︁
𝑘∈K
𝑃(𝐾 = 𝑘)

1 −
𝑘
𝑇

. (8)
To ensure the system meets this workload demand, the
remaining throughput from large (after serving cache-miss
requests) and the small models must together be at least the
cache-hit workload.
𝑁large𝑃large −𝑊miss

+ 𝑁small𝑃small ≥ 𝑊hit. (9)
Optimization Objective. To maintain the highest possi-
ble image quality, we maximize the number of large models
𝑁large, subject to the constraints in Eqs. (5)–(8):
max
𝑁large,𝑁small
𝑁large, s.t. Constraints (6)–(9). (10)
5.3.2 Throughput-Optimized Mode. In this mode, all
cache miss requests are processed using a large model, while
all cache hit requests are processed using a small model.
This strategy minimizes the total computational workload
by leveraging the efficiency of small models for all refinement
tasks. To achieve the highest possible throughput, the system
balances the allocation of large and small models based on
the ratio of cache-hit and cache-miss workloads. Since all
cache-hit requests are processed by a small model, the cache-
hit workload should be adjusted to account for the difference
in throughput between large and small models. The weighted
cache-hit workload is computed as:
𝑊
weighted
hit
=
𝑊hit
𝑃small/𝑃large
. (11)
Here, 𝑊hit is calculated in Eq. (8).
The number of large models needed based on workload:
𝑁large =
𝑊miss
𝑊
weighted
hit
+𝑊miss
× 𝑁 . (12)
where 𝑁 represents the total number of available workers
and 𝑊miss is calculated in Eq. (7).
To achieve our design objective, we develop the Global
Monitor algorithm (shown in Algorithm 1). The algorithm be-
gins by analyzing request patterns from the previous record-
ing period to compute two key workloads: the cache miss
workload, which consists of requests that bypass the cache
7
and must be fully processed by large models, and the cache
hit workload, which includes requests that retrieve an image
from the cache and require additional refinement.
For quality-optimized mode, the algorithm first computes
the minimum number of large models required to meet the
cache miss throughput constraint (Eq. 7), ensuring sufficient
capacity for full image generation. It then iteratively in-
creases the number of large models while verifying that
the combined throughput of the remaining large and small
models remains sufficient to handle the cache hit workload
(Eq. 9). This process continues until the cache-hit workload
constraint is violated, aligning with the optimization objec-
tive in Eq. 10.
For throughput-optimized operation, the system first com-
putes the weighted cache hit workload to account for differ-
ences in throughput between large and small models. It then
balances the allocation of large and small models proportion-
ally to workload demands, ensuring an optimal distribution.
This approach enables efficient scaling while preventing re-
source underutilization.
After obtaining the heuristic-based initial allocation for
either mode, the PID controller acts as a stabilizer to main-
tain stability in resource allocation. It continuously adjusts
the number of large models based on real-time demand fluc-
tuations, ensuring smooth adaptation to changing work-
load conditions. With carefully tuned parameters (𝐾𝑝 = 0.6,
𝐾𝑖 = 0.05, 𝐾𝑑 = 0.05), the controller refines the initial alloca-
tion by dampening rapid changes, preventing abrupt shifts
or oscillations in GPU allocation. This hybrid approach lever-
ages the efficiency of heuristics for quick decision-making
while utilizing PID to enforce gradual, stable adjustments,
ensuring both responsiveness and robustness in dynamic
serving environments.
5.4 Cache Maintenance
To maintain cache relevance, we explore trade-offs between
different cache maintenance strategies. While prior work [6]
adopts a utility-based approach, we investigate whether a
simpler sliding window-based strategy can be equally ef-
fective. In this sliding window approach, newly generated
images update the cache while the oldest images are dis-
carded, effectively following a FIFO management policy. Our
findings indicate that this FIFO-based strategy performs well.
Using the DiffusionDB [3] production dataset, we analyze the
temporal correlation between requests, measuring the time
gap between a new request and its corresponding retrieved
image. Fig. 15 (relocated to §A.1 due to space limitation)
presents this data, revealing that over 90% of cache-hit re-
quests retrieve images cached within four hours of the new
request. This aligns with user behavior, as many users itera-
tively prompt diffusion models with similar text variations
to refine generated content. Beyond its quantitative benefits,
this policy also helps maintain content diversity in the cache.
In contrast, a utility-based cache can lead to high reuse of
Algorithm 1 Global Monitor for Dynamic Model Allocation
Require: Number of GPUs 𝑁 , PID parameters (𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑 ), large model throughput
𝑃large, small model throughput 𝑃small, total denoising steps 𝑇, cache hit rates
𝐻cache, request rate 𝑅, refinement step distribution 𝑘_𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠
Ensure: Dynamic allocation of large and small models to balance request load
1: Initialize PIDController with 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑
2: // Compute cache miss workload
3: miss_workload ← (1 − 𝐻cache ) × 𝑅
4: // Compute refinement workload factor
5: For each k, rate in k_rates.items():
6: 𝐹refine ← 𝐹refine + rate ×

1 − 𝑘
𝑇

7: // Compute hit_workload
8: hit_workload ← 𝐻cache × 𝑅 × 𝐹refine
9: If Quality-Optimized Mode:
10: // Compute minimum number of large models
11: num_large ← ⌈miss_workload / 𝑃large ⌉
12: // Search for the maximum possible number of large models
13: While num_large ≤ N do
14: available_throughput ← num_large × 𝑃large − miss_workload
15: +(N − num_large) × 𝑃small
16: If available_throughput ≥ hit_workload then
17: Increase num_large by 1 and continue
18: Else
19: Decrease num_large by 1 and break
20: Else If Throughput-Optimized Mode:
21: // Compute weighted cache-hit workload
22: hit_workload_weighted ← hit_workload ×
𝑃large
𝑃small
23: // Compute number of large models based on workload ratio
24: num_large ←

miss_workload
hit_workload_weighted+miss_workload

× N
25: // Apply PID adjustment to current_num_large
26: Δlarge ← PIDController.compute(num_large, current_num_large)
27: current_num_large ← current_num_large + Δlarge
28: // Compute final allocations
29: 𝑁large ← max(1, min(round(current_num_large), 𝑁 ))
30: Return
31: model_allocation ← ["large"] ×𝑁large + ["small"] ×(𝑁 − 𝑁large )
a small subset of images, biasing future image generations.
Based on both qualitative and quantitative analysis, MoDM
adopts a simple yet effective FIFO-based cache maintenance.
As inference serving progresses in production, a key de-
sign decision is whether to cache only images generated by
the large model or to include those generated by both the
small and large models. To address this, we evaluate whether
caching images produced by the small model maintains im-
age generation quality. §A.6 provides a detailed quantita-
tive analysis, demonstrating that caching images from the
small model does not degrade generation quality. Combined
with the earlier observation that temporally proximate re-
quests benefit caching, our findings indicate that caching all
images—regardless of model size—enhances overall system
performance without compromising quality. Based on this,
MoDM caches all images generated at runtime.
5.5 Model-Agnostic Caching for Flexible Serving
Prior works [5–8] improve diffusion model inference using
caching but rely on internal, model-specific features (e.g.,
latent representations, activations, image patches), restrict-
ing them to a single model for serving. In contrast, MoDM
caches final images based on §3.1, a universal representa-
tion compatible across multiple model families. This allows
MoDM to serve requests with different diffusion models,
8
dynamically balancing performance and quality to adapt to
workload demands, SLOs, and image quality constraints.
6 Evaluation Methodology
Implementation and Hardware. We implement MoDM,
our inference-serving system, in Python using PyTorch [28],
with the request scheduler, global monitor, and each worker
running in a separate process. Node communication is han-
dled by PyTorch RPC [29], enabling efficient distributed deep
learning. MoDM is deployed on two hardware configura-
tions: a single server with four NVIDIA A40 GPUs (48GB
memory) and a 16-node cluster, each node equipped with
four AMD MI210 GPUs (64GB memory).
Models and Workloads. We evaluate MoDM using four
models to demonstrate cross-model compatibility. The large
models used in our study includes Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large
(SD3.5L) with 8B parameters [14] and FLUX.1-dev (FLUX)
with 12B parameters [30]. The small models include Stable
Diffusion XL (SDXL) with 3B parameters [23] and SANA with
1.6B parameters [15]. SD3.5L and FLUX are both flow-based
models trained using the Flow Matching framework. We also
include Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large-Turbo (SD3.5L-Turbo), a
distilled variant of the SD3.5L model optimized to generate
high-quality images in significantly fewer steps, to compare
MoDM against a distilled baseline. All models except SDXL
run in BF16 precision, while SDXL uses FP16, following
the developers’ default recommendations. All models use
𝑇 = 50 denoising steps and generate 1024×1024 images,
except SD 3.5-Turbo, which uses 10 steps. For evaluation, we
use DiffusionDB [3], a real-world production dataset with
2 million images, and MJHQ [31], a high-quality dataset of
30k MidJourney-generated images.
Modeling of Request Arrivals. We model the request ar-
rival process as a homogeneous Poisson process with varying
rates. We replay the trace of user-submitted prompts from
the DiffusionDB dataset in their original arrival order (and in
trace order for MJHQ, which lacks timestamp information)
to emulate a production environment consistent with the
portal deployment of a Stable Diffusion–based model. The
image cache operates with the proposed FIFO-based cache
management policy that shows a high degree of temporal
locality as detailed in Appendix A.1.
System Performance. We use the following metrics.
Maximum Throughput: We compare the highest through-
put achieved by different baselines assuming that there enough
number of requests to keep the system busy.
Service Level Objective (SLO) Compliance: We analyze
the system’s ability to meet predefined latency thresholds
under varying request rates. Specifically, we evaluate compli-
ance with two SLO requirements: latency within 2× and 4×
that of the large model (Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large) inference.
Tail Latency: We measure the 99th percentile latencies
to capture the worst-case response times and ensure system
stability under load.
Maximum Load: We determine the highest sustainable
request rate the system can handle while maintaining ac-
ceptable latency and quality of service.
Image Quality. Four metrics are used for quality.
CLIPScore [12]: Measures the alignment between the gen-
erated image and its corresponding prompt, providing an
assessment of semantic accuracy.
FID (Fréchet Inception Distance) Score [13]: Quantifies
the similarity between generated and groundtruth images
by comparing their feature distributions.
IS (Inception Score) [21]: Evaluates the quality and diver-
sity of generated images by analyzing the confidence and
variety of class predictions from an Inception network.
PickScore [20]: Estimates human preference alignment
by scoring how likely a generated image would be selected
over others, trained on pairwise human comparisons.
Baselines. We compare against the following baselines.
Vanilla System: An inference-serving system where ev-
ery request is fully processed by the large model (i.e., SD3.5L
or FLUX) without leveraging cached images or retrieval
mechanisms. This represents a traditional approach to serv-
ing diffusion models.
Nirvana [6]: A caching-based diffusion inference system
that improves efficiency by reusing previously generated
images to reduce redundant computation.
Pinecone [32]: Retrieves and serves an image based on
the most similar prompt using CLIP text embedding simi-
larity without refinement; if no suitable match is found, it
generates the image from scratch.
Experimental Setup. Fig. 6 shows the overall hit rate across
all 2 million requests from DiffusionDB with two different
cache sizes. The hit rate remains consistent across both set-
tings, indicating that conducting experiments on a subset of
the dataset provides a generalizable result.
Throughput Experiments: We conduct experiments with
10000 requests from each dataset, using a cache of 10000
images generated by the large model. Unlike latency ex-
periments, these tests focus solely on measuring maximum
system throughput, ignoring timestamps. Additionally, we
perform a scalability study w.r.t. GPU resources.
Latency and SLO Experiments: To evaluate tail latency
and SLO compliance, we use the DiffusionDB dataset, sorting
them by arrival time. We assign timestamps to requests using
a Poisson distribution under different request rates to study
the performance of the system under varying load.
Image Quality Comparison: To assess image quality,
we generate 10000 cached images per dataset in a warm-up
phase, then serve another 10000 requests, retrieving cached
images when possible. This experiment runs in throughput-
optimized mode, representing the worst-case image quality
9
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
Number of Requests (million)
0.6
0.8
1.0
Hit
Rate
Cache Size 10000 Cache Size 100000
Figure 6. Hit rate of MoDM for DiffusionDB.
Vanilla
NIRVANA
Pinecone
MoDM-SDXL
MoDM-SANA
0
1
2
3
4
Normalized
Throughput
1.0 1.2
1.8
2.5
3.2
DiffusionDB
Vanilla
NIRVANA
Pinecone
MoDM-SDXL
MoDM-SANA
0
1
2
3
4
1.0 1.1
1.4
2.1
2.4
MJHQ
Figure 7. Throughput of different baselines normalized to
Vanilla (Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large) on two datasets.
Vanilla
NIRVANA
Pinecone
MoDM-SDXL
MoDM-SANA
0
1
2
3
4
Normalized
Throughput
1.0 1.2
2.0
2.4
2.9
Figure 8. Throughput of different baselines normalized to
Vanilla (FLUX) on DiffusionDB dataset. Both Nirvana and
MoDM baselines use FLUX as a large model.
scenario (§5.3). For FID, we generate four sets of 10000 images
using the large model with same requests, different seeds,
randomly selecting ground truth for comparison.
7 Evaluation Results
We evaluate the performance of MoDM using a variety of
metrics including throughput, adaptability to varying re-
quest rates, scalability with respect to GPU resources, SLO
compliance, and the quality of image generation1.
7.1 Throughput Evaluation
Fig. 7 presents the normalized throughput of MoDM and
several baselines on the DiffusionDB and MJHQ datasets,
using a cache size of 10,000 images. Throughput is normal-
ized to the Vanilla baseline (Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large). On
the real-world DiffusionDB workload, MoDM achieves a
3.2× improvement with SANA as the small model and 2.5×
with SDXL. On MJHQ—a synthetic dataset with less tempo-
ral locality—the cache hit rate drops, resulting in reduced
1Profiling results may vary across different software stack and configura-
tions. The preliminary results presented here are specific to the evaluation
framework used in this study for representative academic purpose.
NIRVANA MoDM
cache-large
MoDM
cache-all
NIRVANA MoDM
cache-large
MoDM
cache-all
NIRVANA MoDM
cache-large
MoDM
cache-all
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Hit
Rate
cache size = 1000 cache size = 10000 cache size = 100000
k = 5 k = 10 k = 15 k = 20 k = 25 k = 30
Figure 9. Comparison of cache hit rates for Nirvana and
MoDM for the DiffusionDB dataset [3].
speedups (2.4× with SANA and 2.1× with SDXL). The per-
formance gains primarily come from avoiding redundant
denoising steps and utilizing smaller models on cache hits.
To evaluate generality across different large model base-
lines, Fig. 8 reports throughput on DiffusionDB normalized to
FLUX. MoDM continues to outperform all baselines, achiev-
ing up to 2.9× speedup with SANA and 2.4× with SDXL
as small models. This demonstrates the robustness of our
approach under varying model configurations and workload
characteristics.
Fig. 9 compares cache hit rates and skipped de-noising
steps between Nirvana and MoDM using DiffusionDB (see
§A.5 for the MJHQ dataset). We evaluate MoDM under two
configurations: (1) caching only images generated by the
large model when a cache miss occurs (MoDM cache-large)
and (2) caching both cache-miss images and refined cache-hit
images from both small and large models (MoDM cache-all).
Cache hit rates are assessed across three cache sizes: 1000,
10000, and 100000.
The results highlight four key insights. First, MoDM achieves
higher cache hit rates than Nirvana. This improvement stems
from our sliding window-based cache maintenance policy,
which better accommodates similar requests occurring in
close temporal proximity (§5.4), and our text-to-image sim-
ilarity based retrieval policy, which enhances visual align-
ment with prompts (§3.2). Second, our text-to-image retrieval
strategy increases the number of skipped de-noising steps. A
higher 𝑘 value (dark green portion) indicates more skipped
steps, leading to substantial computational savings.
Third, caching images from both small and large models fur-
ther improves cache hit rates. This is expected, as caching all
images better serves temporally adjacent requests, whereas
caching only large-model-generated images results in missed
opportunities. Additionally, as shown in §A.6, caching im-
ages generated by the small model does not degrade image
quality, justifying this design choice from a quality stand-
point. Fourth, a cache size of 100000 is sufficient to achieve a
high hit rate of 92.8%. This insight informs our design deci-
sion to balance cache size with hit rates while minimizing
cache management and retrieval overhead. Notably, this is
much smaller than prior work [6].
Fig. 10 illustrates how MoDM handles an increasing re-
quest rate, ranging from 6 to 26 requests per minute. This
10
4 29 54 79 104 129 154
Time (min)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Throughput
(#/min)
SDXL as
small model
Large model only
SANA as small model
Request Rate (demand) Vanilla NIRVANA MoDM
Figure 10. System throughput under increasing request
rates.
experiment was conducted using 16 MI210s. The vanilla sys-
tem reaches a maximum throughput of approximately 10
requests per minute, while Nirvana achieves a 20% improve-
ment. However, as the request rate continues to rise, only
MoDM is able to sustain the required throughput. Between
12 and 22 requests per minute, MoDM uses SDXL as the
small model for efficiency. Beyond 22 requests per minute,
even SDXL cannot meet demand. To address this, MoDM
dynamically switches the small model from SDXL to SANA,
further increasing throughput. We also evaluate these sys-
tems under fluctuating request rates, as shown in Fig. 17 in
the Appendix. MoDM adapts to changes in workload more
effectively than baseline systems, maintaining high through-
put throughout periods of variability. This adaptive model
selection allows MoDM to maintain stable performance
by dynamically balancing image quality and latency,
effectively handling diverse use cases like varying SLO
demands and quality requirements. No prior state-of-
the-art work offers such a broad and flexible trade-off
between latency and quality.
To evaluate MoDM’s scalability, we analyze how through-
put improves with respect to GPU resources. Fig. 11 demon-
strates super-linear scalability on MI210s, indicating that
MoDM effectively utilizes available resources and remains
adaptable to larger clusters without bottlenecks. The ob-
served super-linear scalability arises from the fact that, with
more GPUs, requests are processed at a faster rate. As a result,
within a given time period, a greater number of generated im-
ages are added to the cache, leading to a higher cache hit rate.
This increased cache efficiency further boosts throughput,
reinforcing the benefits of scaling multiple GPUs.
7.2 SLO Compliance
Figs. 12 and 13 depict the SLO violation rates across different
baselines. We evaluate SLO violations under two conditions:
(1) when the generation latency exceeds 2× that of the large
model (Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large), as shown in Fig. 12, and
(2) when it surpasses 4× the large model’s latency, as shown
in Fig. 13. Both figures compare SLO violations across vary-
ing request loads for two hardware configurations: 4 NVIDIA
A40s and 16 AMD MI210s. The results demonstrate MoDM’s
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32
Number of AMD MI210 GPUs
0
5
10
Norm.
Throughput
1.0
2.3
3.3
4.2
5.7
7.2
8.1
9.3
Figure 11. Scalability of MoDM with increasing #GPUs.
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Request Rate (#/min)
0.0
0.5
1.0 4x NVIDIA A40
Vanilla NIRVANA MoDM
6 10 14 18 22 26
Request Rate (#/min)
0.0
0.5
1.0
SLO
Violation
Rate
(2x)
16x AMD MI210
Figure 12. SLO violation rate (>2× inference latency of Sta-
ble Diffusion-3.5 Large) for different request rates.
ability to sustain significantly higher request loads without
violating SLO, using the same hardware resources.
At low request rates, all three systems meet SLO require-
ments with minimal violations. However, as the request rate
exceeds 5 requests per minute on A40s and 14 requests per
minute on MI210s, SLO violations become predominant in
both the vanilla system and Nirvana. In contrast, MoDM
maintains compliance for much higher loads, supporting
up to 10 requests per minute on A40s and 22 requests per
minute on MI210s under the 2× threshold, and up to 26 re-
quests per minute on MI210s under the 4× threshold. MoDM
achieves this by leveraging a combination of large and small
models. As shown in Fig. 10, our system adaptively switches
to a small diffusion model for inference under high request
rates, significantly reducing computational overhead. These
results underscore MoDM’s superior efficiency in handling
high request loads while minimizing SLO violations. §A.2 in
appendix expands on these results further showing the 99th
percentile tail latency values for different baselines.
7.3 Image Quality
Table 2 compares the image generation quality of MoDM
with various baselines on the DiffusionDB and MJHQ-30k
datasets, using SD3.5L as the vanilla large model. Across both
datasets, MoDM achieves CLIP, IS, and Pick scores compa-
rable to the Vanilla baseline and Nirvana, demonstrating
strong semantic alignment, perceptual diversity, and human
preference alignment. Importantly, MoDM obtains substan-
tially lower FID scores compared to standalone small or dis-
tilled models like SDXL, SD3.5L-Turbo, and SANA, indicating
11
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Request Rate (#/min)
0.0
0.5
1.0 4x NVIDIA A40
Vanilla NIRVANA MoDM
6 10 14 18 22 26
Request Rate (#/min)
0.0
0.5
1.0
SLO
Violation
Rate
(4x)
16x AMD MI210
Figure 13. SLO violation rate (>4× inference latency of Sta-
ble Diffusion-3.5 Large) for different request rates.
Table 2. Image quality on DiffusionDB and MJHQ-30k
(Vanilla model: SD3.5L). Higher is better for CLIP, IS, and
Pick; lower is better for FID.
DiffusionDB MJHQ-30k
Baseline CLIP ↑ FID ↓ IS ↑ Pick ↑ CLIP ↑ FID ↓ IS ↑ Pick ↑
Vanilla (SD3.5L) 28.55 6.29 15.52 21.44 28.77 5.16 25.84 21.67
SDXL 29.30 16.29 16.90 21.45 29.66 12.67 25.82 21.55
SD3.5L-Turbo 27.23 14.63 15.38 21.45 27.84 10.68 23.70 21.59
SANA 28.08 19.96 12.20 20.78 28.83 16.31 21.90 21.32
Nirvana 28.02 9.01 15.38 21.28 28.57 5.37 25.04 21.59
Pinecone 25.98 14.18 15.09 20.80 27.20 6.80 25.99 21.27
MoDM-SDXL 28.70 11.85 15.27 21.00 28.79 6.87 25.46 21.33
MoDM-SANA 28.01 16.96 12.67 20.79 28.82 9.96 22.25 21.28
it preserves a high-quality distribution similar to the large
model and avoids the occasional distortions and defects typi-
cal of small model outputs. In contrast, the Pinecone baseline
shows noticeably lower CLIP scores, reflecting weaker image-
text alignment and highlighting the limitations of retrieval-
only methods without generative refinement—emphasizing
the effectiveness of MoDM’s refinement approach.
Separately, Table 3 reports image quality on DiffusionDB
using FLUX as the vanilla large model. Here, MoDM again
balances quality and efficiency by achieving CLIP, IS, and
Pick scores close to the strong FLUX baseline while improv-
ing upon the FID scores of standalone small or distilled mod-
els. This confirms that MoDM’s approach generalizes well
across different large model backbones. Fig. 20 in Appen-
dix shows example images generated via various methods
comparing with MoDM, clearly showcasing its high quality
image generation ability.
7.4 Comparison on the Quality-Performance
Trade-off Space
To complement our main results, Fig. 14 visualizes the trade-
off space between image generation quality (measured using
the FID score) and system throughput for various diffusion-
based serving strategies. We plot the inverse throughput
(1/Throughput) on the x-axis and FID score on the y-axis:
both axes where lower values are desirable. This orienta-
tion highlights the dual objective in MoDM of optimizing
Table 3. Image quality on DiffusionDB (Vanilla model:
FLUX). Higher is better for CLIP, IS, and Pick; lower is better
for FID.
Baseline CLIP ↑ FID ↓ IS ↑ Pick ↑
Vanilla (FLUX) 26.82 6.02 16.69 21.29
SDXL 29.30 17.60 16.90 21.45
SD3.5L-Turbo 27.23 15.11 15.38 21.45
SANA 28.08 24.37 12.20 20.78
Nirvana 26.01 9.07 15.44 21.06
Pinecone 24.37 19.41 16.08 20.63
MoDM-SDXL 28.41 10.74 15.61 21.13
MoDM-SANA 27.59 16.84 12.70 20.84
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
FID
1 / Throughput
Lower is Better
Lower
is
Better
Pareto Frontier
FLUX
NIRVANA
Pinecone
SDXL
SD3.5L-Turbo
MoDM-SDXL-cachelarge
MoDM-SANA-cachelarge
MoDM-SD3.5L-Turbo-cachelarge
MoDM-SD3.5L-Turbo-cacheall
MoDM-SD3.5L-Turbo-cachelarge-cachesize5k
MoDM-SD3.5L-Turbo-cachelarge-threshold+0.01
Figure 14. Quality-performance trade-off across serving
strategies. The large model used is FLUX, and the evaluation
is conducted on the DiffusionDB dataset. The default cache
size for all systems is 10k unless otherwise specified.
for faster image generation while maintaining high visual
fidelity.
In this figure, we show multiple data points of MoDM by
changing various runtime parameters including (1) small
model used: SANA, SDXL, and SD3.5L-Turbo), (2) caching
strategies: caching images generated by large model only
and caching images generated by all models, (3) cache size:
10k images (default) and 5k images, and (4) varying cache hit
threshold: 0.25 (default) and 0.26 (i.e., +0.01). The figure high-
lights three key takeaways. First, MoDM offers a flexible
configuration that supports pairing any two diffusion models:
not only from the same family but also across different fami-
lies, including distilled variants, enabling a unique and cus-
tomizable trade-off between output quality and generation
performance. Second, MoDM supports runtime adaptivity
to system parameters, demonstrating its capability to dy-
namically adjust and maintain optimal quality-performance
balance under varying conditions. Third, within the land-
scape of state-of-the-art diffusion-based image generation
systems, MoDM achieves a system design that resides on
the Pareto frontier, effectively pushing the boundary of the
achievable trade-off between quality and performance.
7.5 Additional Results
Due to page limitation, we include additional results in ap-
pendix that includes (1) comparison of 99th percentile tail
12
latency of different baselines: §A.2, (2) throughput compari-
son across fluctuating request rates: §A.3, (3) comparison of
energy consumption of different approaches: §A.4, (4) cache
hit rates for the MJHQ dataset: §A.5, and (5) examples of
images generated using different baselines: §A.7.
8 Related Works
Caching Strategies for Diffusion Models. Caching strate-
gies accelerate diffusion models by reducing redundant com-
putation. Works like Nirvana [6] used latent caching, but
it was limited by model-specific constraints and high stor-
age overhead. Approaches like DeepCache [7] and Patched-
Serve [5] cached intermediate features and patches, respec-
tively. MoDM innovates by caching final generated images
along with CLIP embeddings, offering benefits such as cross-
model compatibility, reduced storage, and enhanced seman-
tic alignment through text-image similarity. Unlike SDEdit [33],
which focuses on guided image regeneration, MoDM cre-
ates new images by leveraging cached content. EchoLM [34]
maintains a cache of full-model responses and uses cache
hits as few-shot prompts to a small LLM for knowledge dis-
tillation. MoDM uses an orthogonal technique for diffusion
models by using cached final images under a PID-driven
scheduler, dynamically partitioning GPU resources and se-
lecting the number of denoising steps.
ML optimizations. While techniques like progressive dis-
tillation [35], structural pruning [36], quantization [37, 38],
and patching [39] have been widely adopted in diffusion
models, their single-model, training-focused approach lacks
the dynamic adaptability needed to handle real-world work-
load fluctuations effectively. In contrast, MoDM’s mixture-of-
models strategy draws on the strengths of Switch Transform-
ers [40] from language models, adapting them for diffusion
processes to better address these challenges. Flow Match-
ing [41] reframes diffusion as a Continuous Normalizing
Flow (CNF) trained via vector-field regression on optimal-
transport–inspired paths, achieving high-fidelity sampling in
under 10 Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) steps. While
these algorithmic advances tackle the modeling side of the
latency–quality trade-off, MoDM addresses the runtime side
and can accelerate any diffusion backbone as shown by using
SD3.5L, which utilizes the CNF framework internally.
Adaptive steps selection and Query-Aware Model Se-
lection. AdaDiff [42] proposes selecting adaptive denoising
steps based on prompt richness, while other works [43–45]
explore early exit, fast sampling, or step-skipping techniques.
A key innovation of MoDM is using a cached image as a
starting point, combined with a dynamic 𝑘-selection mech-
anism that adjusts the number of denoising steps based on
CLIP [12] scores and predefined quality constraints. Diff
Serve [46] is a query-aware approach for selecting diffusion
models, employing a cascading strategy of light and heavy
models with a discriminator-based method. This makes it an
orthogonal approach to MoDM.
Cloud Serving Infrastructure. MoDM builds on resource
management from distributed systems and AI scheduling, in-
corporating a PID-controlled resource allocator with diffusion-
specific metrics. While Kubernetes-based autoscalers [47–
51] focus on latency reduction, they lack diffusion model
awareness, making them complementary to MoDM and
easy to integrate. Inspired by DNN serving systems [52–54]
and cache-aware LLMs [55], MoDM introduces cache-aware
queue resource distribution.
9 Conclusions
This paper introduced MoDM, an efficient serving system
for diffusion-based text-to-image generation. MoDM dynam-
ically balances between inference latency and image quality
by leveraging a mixture of diffusion models. The key innova-
tion is its cache-based approach: when a new request closely
matches a previously generated image, the system retrieves
the cached image, reintroduces noise, and refines/de-noises
it using a small model, while cache-miss requests are handled
by a large model. By strategically combining small and large
models, MoDM achieves over 2× higher throughput, ideal
scalability with GPU resources, and superior load handling
without violating SLO, all while maintaining image quality
comparable to large-model inference at a fraction of the cost.
10 Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by Semiconductor Research
Corporation (SRC) as part of the GRC AIHW grant, and AMD
AI & HPC Cluster Program.
References
[1] Adobe unleashes new era of creativity for all with the commercial
release of generative ai. 2023.
[2] Dall-e-2. 2023.
[3] Zijie J Wang, Evan Montoya, David Munechika, Haoyang Yang, Ben-
jamin Hoover, and Duen Horng Chau. Diffusiondb: A large-scale
prompt gallery dataset for text-to-image generative models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.14896, 2022.
[4] Felix Wimbauer, Bichen Wu, Edgar Schoenfeld, Xiaoliang Dai, Ji Hou,
Zijian He, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Peizhao Zhang, Sam Tsai, Jonas Kohler,
et al. Cache me if you can: Accelerating diffusion models through
block caching. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6211–6220, 2024.
[5] Desen Sun, Zepeng Zhao, and Yuke Wang. Patchedserve: A patch
management framework for slo-optimized hybrid resolution diffusion
serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09253, 2025.
[6] Shubham Agarwal, Subrata Mitra, Sarthak Chakraborty, Srikrishna
Karanam, Koyel Mukherjee, and Shiv Saini. Approximate caching for
efficiently serving diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04429,
2023.
[7] Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, and Xinchao Wang. Deepcache: Accel-
erating diffusion models for free. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
15762–15772, June 2024.
13
[8] Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, Michael Bi Mi, and Xinchao Wang.
Learning-to-cache: Accelerating diffusion transformer via layer
caching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:133282–
133304, 2025.
[9] Pratheba Selvaraju, Tianyu Ding, Tianyi Chen, Ilya Zharkov, and
Luming Liang. Fora: Fast-forward caching in diffusion transformer
acceleration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01425, 2024.
[10] Chang Zou, Evelyn Zhang, Runlin Guo, Haohang Xu, Conghui He,
Xuming Hu, and Linfeng Zhang. Accelerating diffusion transformers
with dual feature caching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18911, 2024.
[11] Chen-Yi Lu, Shubham Agarwal, Md Mehrab Tanjim, Kanak Mahadik,
Anup Rao, Subrata Mitra, Shiv Kumar Saini, Saurabh Bagchi, and
Somali Chaterji. Recon: Training-free acceleration for text-to-image
synthesis with retrieval of concept prompt trajectories. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 288–306. Springer, 2024.
[12] Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin
Choi. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for image caption-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.
[13] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard
Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale up-
date rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[14] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas
Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic
Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Alex
Goodwin, Yannik Marek, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis, 2024.
[15] Enze Xie, Junsong Chen, Junyu Chen, Han Cai, Haotian Tang, Yu-
jun Lin, Zhekai Zhang, Muyang Li, Ligeng Zhu, Yao Lu, et al. Sana:
Efficient high-resolution image synthesis with linear diffusion trans-
formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10629, 2024.
[16] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser,
and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffu-
sion models, 2021.
[17] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang,
Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu
Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffu-
sion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
[18] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Gen-
erative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 27, 2014.
[19] Diederik P Kingma, Max Welling, et al. Auto-encoding variational
bayes, 2013.
[20] Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe
Penna, and Omer Levy. Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user prefer-
ences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:36652–36663, 2023.
[21] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and
Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 2818–2826, 2016.
[22] Jason Baldridge, Jakob Bauer, Mukul Bhutani, Nicole Brichtova, An-
drew Bunner, Lluis Castrejon, Kelvin Chan, Yichang Chen, Sander
Dieleman, Yuqing Du, et al. Imagen 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07009,
2024.
[23] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim
Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Im-
proving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
[24] Wenhao Li, Xiu Su, Yu Han, Shan You, Tao Huang, and Chang Xu.
Adaptive training meets progressive scaling: Elevating efficiency in
diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13307, 2023.
[25] Shuai Yang, Yukang Chen, Luozhou Wang, Shu Liu, and Yingcong
Chen. Denoising diffusion step-aware models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03337, 2023.
[26] Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Understanding the role of noise
schedules in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00364, 2022.
[27] Y. Li et al. Early structure, late refinement: Understanding the progres-
sion of denoising in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01234,
2023.
[28] Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh
Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni
Burovski, et al. Pytorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic
python bytecode transformation and graph compilation. In Proceedings
of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, pages 929–
947, 2024.
[29] Pritam Damania, Shen Li, Alban Desmaison, Alisson Azzolini, Brian
Vaughan, Edward Yang, Gregory Chanan, Guoqiang Jerry Chen,
Hongyi Jia, Howard Huang, et al. Pytorch rpc: Distributed deep learn-
ing built on tensor-optimized remote procedure calls. Proceedings of
Machine Learning and Systems, 5:219–231, 2023.
[30] Black Forest Labs. FLUX.1: Introducing flux1 tools. https://
blackforestlabs.io/flux-1/, November 2024. Accessed: 2025-07-22.
[31] PlaygroundAI. MJHQ-30K Dataset. 2023.
[32] Pinecone. Making stable diffusion faster with intelligent caching.
https://www.pinecone.io/learn/faster-stable-diffusion/, 2023. Ac-
cessed: 2025-07-21.
[33] Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu,
Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Guided image synthesis
and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
[34] Yifan Yu, Yu Gan, Lillian Tsai, Nikhil Sarda, Jiaming Shen, Yanqi Zhou,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Fan Lai, Henry M Levy, and David Culler.
Echolm: Accelerating llm serving with real-time knowledge distilla-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12689, 2025.
[35] Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sam-
pling of diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022.
[36] Gongfan Fang Xinyin Ma Xinchao Wang. Structural pruning for
diffusion models—supplementary materials—.
[37] Xiuyu Li, Yijiang Liu, Long Lian, Huanrui Yang, Zhen Dong, Daniel
Kang, Shanghang Zhang, and Kurt Keutzer. Q-diffusion: Quantiz-
ing diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 17535–17545, 2023.
[38] Yanjing Li, Sheng Xu, Xianbin Cao, Xiao Sun, and Baochang Zhang.
Q-dm: An efficient low-bit quantized diffusion model. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 36:76680–76691, 2023.
[39] Zhendong Wang, Yifan Jiang, Huangjie Zheng, Peihao Wang,
Pengcheng He, Zhangyang Wang, Weizhu Chen, Mingyuan Zhou,
et al. Patch diffusion: Faster and more data-efficient training of dif-
fusion models. Advances in neural information processing systems,
36:72137–72154, 2023.
[40] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers:
Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(120):1–39, 2022.
[41] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel,
and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
[42] Hui Zhang, Zuxuan Wu, Zhen Xing, Jie Shao, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
Adadiff: Adaptive step selection for fast diffusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.14768, 2023.
[43] Taehong Moon, Moonseok Choi, EungGu Yun, Jongmin Yoon, Gay-
oung Lee, and Juho Lee. Early exiting for accelerated inference in
diffusion models. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic
Inference {\&} Generative Modeling, 2023.
[44] Zhifeng Kong and Wei Ping. On fast sampling of diffusion probabilistic
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00132, 2021.
14
[45] Zeyinzi Jiang, Chaojie Mao, Yulin Pan, Zhen Han, and Jingfeng Zhang.
Scedit: Efficient and controllable image diffusion generation via skip
connection editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern Recognition, pages 8995–9004, 2024.
[46] Sohaib Ahmad, Qizheng Yang, Haoliang Wang, Ramesh K Sitara-
man, and Hui Guan. Diffserve: Efficiently serving text-to-image
diffusion models with query-aware model scaling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.15381, 2024.
[47] Daniel Crankshaw, Xin Wang, Guilio Zhou, Michael J Franklin,
Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Clipper: A {Low-Latency} online
prediction serving system. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17), pages 613–627, 2017.
[48] Jashwant Raj Gunasekaran, Cyan Subhra Mishra, Prashanth Thi-
nakaran, Bikash Sharma, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, and Chita R
Das. Cocktail: A multidimensional optimization for model serving in
cloud. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 22), pages 1041–1057, 2022.
[49] Yunseong Lee, Alberto Scolari, Byung-Gon Chun, Marco Domenico
Santambrogio, Markus Weimer, and Matteo Interlandi. {PRETZEL}:
Opening the black box of machine learning prediction serving sys-
tems. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 18), pages 611–626, 2018.
[50] Neeraja J Yadwadkar, Francisco Romero, Qian Li, and Christos
Kozyrakis. A case for managed and model-less inference serving.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems,
pages 184–191, 2019.
[51] Chengliang Zhang, Minchen Yu, Wei Wang, and Feng Yan. {MArk}:
Exploiting cloud services for {Cost-Effective},{SLO-Aware} machine
learning inference serving. In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Confer-
ence (USENIX ATC 19), pages 1049–1062, 2019.
[52] Arpan Gujarati, Reza Karimi, Safya Alzayat, Wei Hao, Antoine Kauf-
mann, Ymir Vigfusson, and Jonathan Mace. Serving {DNNs} like
clockwork: Performance predictability from the bottom up. In 14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 20), pages 443–462, 2020.
[53] Feng Yan, Yuxiong He, Olatunji Ruwase, and Evgenia Smirni. Efficient
deep neural network serving: Fast and furious. IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, 15(1):112–126, 2018.
[54] Qiuru Lin, Sai Wu, Junbo Zhao, Jian Dai, Meng Shi, Gang Chen, and
Feifei Li. Smartlite: A dbms-based serving system for dnn inference
in resource-constrained environments. Proceedings of the VLDB En-
dowment, 17(3):278–291, 2023.
[55] David Dominguez-Sal, Mihai Surdeanu, Josep Aguilar-Saborit, and
Josep Lluis Larriba-Pey. Cache-aware load balancing for question
answering. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Information
and knowledge management, pages 1271–1280, 2008.
[56] Jie You, Jae-Won Chung, and Mosharaf Chowdhury. Zeus: Under-
standing and optimizing GPU energy consumption of DNN training.
In USENIX NSDI, 2023.
15
A Appendix
A.1 Timing Analysis Between a New Prompt and its
Retrieved Cache Image
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Time Difference (hours)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Fraction
of
Cache
Hits
> 90% of cache hit requests
retrieve images cached
within the last 4 hours
Figure 15. Distriution of time elapsed between new requests
and the generation of their retrieved images from the cache.
To evaluate the effectiveness of a simple FIFO-based cache
management strategy, we conduct an experiment using the
production dataset DiffusionDB [3], which accurately cap-
tures the temporal correlation between different prompts.
Specifically, we measure the time elapsed between a new
prompt that results in a cache hit and the original image
generation of its retrieved cached item. Fig. 15 presents the
distribution of these time intervals, showing that over 90% of
new prompts retrieve images generated within the past four
hours. In other words, caching all requests from the last four
hours can achieve a high cache hit rate of over 90%, making it
feasible to ignore images generated much earlier. This behav-
ior is intuitive, as users often iteratively refine their prompts
to better align the generated visual content with their expec-
tations. Based on this quantitative analysis, MoDM adopts a
simple yet effective FIFO-based cache maintenance strategy.
A.2 Tail Latency Evaluation
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Request Rate (#/min)
0
5000
10000
P99
Latency
(s)
4x NVIDIA A40
Vanilla NIRVANA MoDM
6 10 14 18 22 26
Request Rate (#/min)
0
5000
10000
P99
Latency
(s)
16x AMD MI210
Figure 16. P99 tail latency for varying request rates.
Fig. 16 demonstrates that MoDM significantly reduces the
99th percentile tail latency compared to the vanilla system
and Nirvana. The upper subfigure compares tail latency
using 4 A40s. At 4 requests per minute, all three systems
maintain a low tail latency of under 200 seconds. However,
as the request rate increases from 4 to 10 requests per minute,
the tail latency of the vanilla system and Nirvana surges
past 1000 seconds, making them impractical for real-time
serving. In contrast, MoDM can handle significantly higher
system loads, supporting up to 10 requests per minute with
the given GPU resources. Due to the compute-heavy nature
of diffusion model serving, reducing latency beyond this rate
requires a substantial increase in GPU resources.
The lower subfigure in Fig. 16 presents tail latency with
16 MI210s. Similarly, both the vanilla system and Nirvana
can only sustain a low tail latency when the request rate
does not exceed 10 requests per minute. In contrast, MoDM
remains stable at much higher request rates, successfully
handling over 20 requests per minute, further demonstrating
its robustness and scalability under increasing load.
A.3 Throughput Under Fluctuating Request Rates
4 29 54 79 104 129 154 179 204 229 254 279 304 329 354 379 404 429
Time (min)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Throughput
(#/min)
Request Rate (demand) Vanilla NIRVANA MoDM
Figure 17. Throughput over time under fluctuating request
rates.
Fig. 17 illustrates how different systems respond to varying
load conditions over time. As the request rate increases and
decreases, MoDM consistently adapts to match the demand,
achieving higher throughput across both low and high load
periods. In contrast, baseline systems such as Vanilla and
Nirvana show noticeable lag during peak request intervals,
indicating limited scalability. Notably, their throughput re-
mains high during low request rates because they are still
draining queued requests from earlier peak periods. These
results highlight the effectiveness of our design in maintain-
ing high throughput even under rapidly changing workload
patterns.
A.4 Energy Savings
We measure the energy consumption of various baselines
using Zeus [56], a Python-based energy measurement toolkit.
The proposed methods, MoDM-SDXL and MoDM-SANA,
are compared against two references: a standard SD3.5-Large
(Vanilla) model and Nirvana. Fig. 18 presents the energy
savings of different systems relative to the vanilla baseline.
Nirvana achieves a modest 23.9% energy improvement, pri-
marily due to skipping de-noising steps. However, these
benefits are limited as inference still relies on a single, large
16
model. In contrast, MoDM significantly enhances energy
efficiency: (1) MoDM-SDXL, which utilizes the SDXL model
for cache-hit requests, achieves a 46.7% energy savings, and
(2) MoDM-SANA, which leverages the smaller SANA-1.6B
model for cache-hit requests while maintaining compara-
ble image quality, achieves even greater efficiency, reaching
66.3% energy savings. These results underscore two key in-
sights. First, caching image generations from a large base
model effectively reduces redundant computational over-
head. Second, using lighter, more efficient downstream dif-
fusion models (e.g., SANA-1.6B) further amplifies energy
savings.
V
a
n
i
l
l
a
N
I
R
V
A
N
A
M
o
D
M
-
S
D
X
L
M
o
D
M
-
S
A
N
A
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Energy
Savings
(%)
0.0%
23.9%
46.7%
66.3%
Figure 18. Energy Savings of different baselines normalized
to Vanilla (Stable Diffusion-3.5-Large) on DiffusionDB.
A.5 Cache Hit Rate Comparison on MJHQ Dataset
NIRVANA MoDM
cache-large
MoDM
cache-all
NIRVANA MoDM
cache-large
MoDM
cache-all
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Hit
Rate
cache size = 1000 cache size = 10000
k = 5 k = 10 k = 15 k = 20 k = 25 k = 30
Figure 19. Comparison of cache hit rates for Nirvana and
MoDM for the MJHQ dataset [31]. A cache size of 100k is
not shown as the dataset only has 30k prompts.
Fig. 19 compares the cache hit rates of Nirvana and MoDM
on the MJHQ dataset [31]. The figure evaluates hit rates
for two cache sizes: 1000 and 10000 images. A cache size of
100000 is not feasible for this dataset, as it contains only 30000
prompts. Unlike DiffusionDB, MJHQ is not a production
dataset, meaning there is no strong temporal correlation
between requests. Despite this, Fig. 19 demonstrates that
MoDM consistently improves cache hit rates compared to
Nirvana.
Interestingly, the results reveal minimal difference be-
tween caching only images from the large model and caching
all images. This is because the dataset lacks temporal prox-
imity of similar prompts, making the inclusion of all images
in the cache less beneficial. Without temporal correlation,
caching images generated by a small or a large model pro-
vides similar benefits. This suggests that when prompts sub-
mitted in close temporal proximity lack significant similar-
ity, caching only images generated by the large model (cache
miss requests in MoDM) is sufficient. Nonetheless, MoDM’s
retrieval and management policies effectively reduce com-
putational overhead, leading to substantial improvements in
overall throughput (§7.1).
A.6 Effects of Caching Images Generated by the
Small Model
In this section, we evaluate the impact of caching images
generated by the small model based on retrieved previously
generated images. Specifically, we aim to answer the follow-
ing question: Does adding images generated by the small
model to the cache preserve the quality of future image
generations? To evaluate the impact of adding cache-hit
images to the cache for subsequent retrieval and reuse, we
conduct the following experiment. First, we generate 10000
images using Stable Diffusion-3.5 Large (SD3.5L) to warm
up the cache. Then, we process another 10000 new requests,
attempting to retrieve and reuse images from the cache. If
a request results in a cache hit, we proceed with three dif-
ferent generation strategies. The first strategy is to perform
full generation, where the cache-hit request is processed
by SD3.5L to generate an entirely new image. The second
strategy is to refine the retrieved image using SD3.5L. The
third strategy is to refine the retrieved image using SDXL, a
smaller and more efficient model.
This process results in three sets of newly generated cache-
hit images: one generated directly by SD3.5L without any
caching (the golden standard), one refined using retrieved
cache-hit images by SD3.5L, and one refined using retrieved
cache-hit images by SDXL. We then use these three cache sets
separately to serve another 10000 new requests, generating
all images using SDXL. Finally, we evaluate the quality of the
final generated cache hit images using CLIP score. Our eval-
uation shows that using directly generated SD3.5L images as
cache achieves a CLIP score of 29.63. Using cache-hit images
refined by SD3.5L achieves a CLIP score of 28.58, while using
cache-hit images refined by SDXL results in a CLIP score of
28.32. The drop in CLIP score is minimal, demonstrating that
the images generated by reusing cache-hit images refined by
both models maintain high text-image alignment. Consider-
ing the boost in cache hit rate by adding these images (more
details in §7.1, Fig. 9), this approach proves to be a valuable
strategy for improving system efficiency while maintaining
image quality. Based on this quantitative analysis, we make a
design decision to cache all images (generated by both small
and large models) without degrading the quality of future
image generation.
17
A.7 Examples of Image Generation
Fig. 20 presents examples of images generated using different
serving systems: (1) SD3.5L: a large model, Stable Diffusion-
3.5-Large (referred to as vanilla in the main text), (2) SDXL:
a relatively smaller model, Stable Diffusion-XL, (3) SANA:
a small model, SANA-1.6B [15], (4) MoDM-SDXL: the pro-
posed system using SD3.5L as the large model and SDXL as
the small model, and (5) MoDM-SANA: the proposed system
with SD3.5L as the large model and SANA as the small model.
The prompts are selected from both the DiffusionDB [3] and
MJHQ [31] datasets, and MoDM utilizes cached images from
previous generations to produce new outputs using a small
model. The figure illustrates that the image quality of smaller
models, SDXL and SANA, is sometimes inferior to that of the
larger SD3.5L model. For instance, for the prompt "A woman
sitting...", SDXL generates an image with incorrect colors of
the sofa and French Bulldog. Similarly, for the prompt "Joy
of human...", SANA fails to include a human in the image. In
contrast, MoDM maintains image quality by accurately pre-
serving content while benefiting from the reduced latency
of small model inference.
A.8 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
In this section, we clarify a few frequently asked questions
about our design choices.
Q.1. Why does MoDM use small and large models?
Response: This approach balances inference latency and im-
age generation quality. Specifically, we observe that caching
images generated by large models and using them as a start-
ing point for small models to serve prompts with similar
visual intentions leads to excellent image quality. §5.1 ex-
plains how to generate an image at a reduced cost by utilizing
a cached image. The quality degradation is minimal, and in
some cases, it even outperforms a standalone model with-
out caching, all while significantly reducing compute and
latency. Therefore, the proposed mixture of models approach
combines the image quality of large models with the lower
latency of small models.
Q.2. How does MoDM maintain compatibility with
different model families?
Response: This is made possible by our caching strategy,
which caches final generated images rather than intermediate
features. Final images are more versatile and recognizable
across different models and model families. §5.5 explores
model-agnostic caching for serving across multiple model
families.
Q.3. What does MoDM cache?
Response: We cache final generated images.
Q.4. Why do we cache final images and not latent in-
termediate?
Response: Final images are directly usable and model in-
dependent, making them universally compatible across all
model families. In contrast, intermediate latents vary be-
tween models, limiting serving to a single model.
Q.5. How is our approach similar or different from
speculative decoding in LLMs?
Response: Speculative decoding differs from caching-based
image generation in MoDM. In speculative decoding, a small
draft model predicts tokens for text generation, while a
large verification model checks and refines them. In con-
trast, MoDM does not involve verification by a large model.
Instead, each prompt is processed by either the small or large
model, depending on cache availability: ensuring efficiency
without additional verification overhead.
Q.6. How well do cross-model queries work in MoDM?
Response: We demonstrate cross-model compatibility using
two model families: Stable Diffusion and SANA. §7 presents
overall throughput and how MoDM utilizes different models
to handle high request loads. §7.3 evaluates the image quality
produced by different model families. §A.7 provides visual
examples of images generated using a mix of models from
different families.
Q.7. How are the thresholds on 𝑘 decided?
Response: §5.2 explains how thresholds on𝑘 are determined
using text-to-image similarity scores, ensuring a high image
quality factor of ≥ 0.95.
Q.8. Where is the main performance benefit of MoDM
coming from?
Response: The significant performance uplift of MoDM
is driven by two key factors: (1) skipping a subset of de-
noising/refinement steps by leveraging cached items, and
(2) utilizing a small model for inference when a cache hit
occurs.
Q.9. Does MoDM always use a small model to serve a
requests that hit in the cache?
Response: To maximize system throughput, MoDM defaults
to using a small diffusion model for all requests hitting in
the cache (throughput-optimized mode, §5.3). Additionally,
MoDM offers flexibility for service providers to prioritize im-
age quality by serving cache hits with a large model when re-
quest rates are low and SLO requirements allow (quality-
optimized mode, §5.3). Fig. 10 illustrates this use-case, show-
ing that when request rates drop below 10 per minute, cache
hits can be served by the large model to maximize image
quality without violating SLO. However, MoDM can also
run in throughput-optimized mode at low request rates if
preferred.
Q.10. How does MoDM maintain image generation di-
versity?
Response: While MoDM generates images that hit in the
cache by reusing previously generated outputs—through
controlled noise injection and partial denoising—a key de-
sign choice is the adoption of a FIFO-based caching strategy.
Unlike utility-based policies (e.g., those inspired by CPU
hardware caches), the FIFO-based approach ensures auto-
matic eviction of cached images after a fixed time window.
This prevents a small set of highly popular cached images
18
from dominating reuse, thereby encouraging diversity in the
cache and maintaining adaptability to evolving input distri-
butions. A quantitative evaluation of generation diversity is
a compelling direction for future work.
B Artifact Appendix
B.1 Abstract
This artifact accompanies our paper MoDM: Efficient Serving
for Image Generation via Mixture-of-Diffusion Models, which
introduces MoDM, a novel caching-based serving system
for text-to-image diffusion models that balances latency and
image quality by dynamically leveraging a mixture of large
and small diffusion models.
The artifact provides detailed instructions for environ-
ment setup, dataset preparation, and running experiments
to reproduce our main results. In particular, we focus on
reproducing:
• The throughput comparisons shown in Figure 7,
demonstrating MoDM’s significant improvements over
baseline systems under different workloads.
• The image quality comparisons summarized in Ta-
ble 2.
By following our artifact, reviewers will be able to repli-
cate our experimental pipeline, observe MoDM’s dynamic
scheduling of diffusion models, and confirm the throughput-
quality trade-offs across different datasets.
B.2 Artifact check-list (meta-information)
• Algorithm: Diffusion-based text-to-image generation
• Program: Python 3
• Compilation: Not required; all components are interpreted
• Models: Stable Diffusion 3.5-Large, Stable Diffusion XL and
SANA-1.6B
• Data sets: DiffusionDB and MJHQ-30k
• Run-time environment: Python environment with re-
quired libraries (provided via requirements.txt)
• Hardware: 4 or more GPUs with at least 40GB VRAM each
• Run-time state: Initializes with a cache of 10,000 images
• Execution: Processes 1K requests from each dataset to eval-
uate throughput and image quality
• Metrics: Throughput (reqs/min), CLIPScore, PickScore, In-
ception Score (IS)
• Output: Generated images under the images directory and
throughput reports in text files for each baseline on both
datasets
• Experiments: Compare MoDM against baselines on through-
put and image quality using the same workload and cached
dataset
• Disk space required: 100GB
• Time to prepare workflow: 1 hour
• Time to complete experiments: 16 hours
• Publicly available: Yes
• Code license: MIT License
• Data license: Original datasets (DiffusionDB, MJHQ) follow
their respective licenses. Cached images generated by us
are released under CC BY 4.0.
• Workflow automation: Manual execution via provided
scripts
B.3 Description
B.3.1 How to access. The artifact code base can be down-
loaded from https://github.com/stsxxx/MoDM.git.
B.3.2 Hardware dependencies.
• We conducted our experiments on two systems: a
server equipped with an Intel® Xeon® Platinum 8380
CPU and four NVIDIA A40 GPUs (48GB each), and
a cluster with 16 nodes, each node containing four
AMD MI210 GPUs (64GB each).
• The artifact requires a server equipped with 4 GPUs,
each having at least 40GB of memory.
B.3.3 Software dependencies.
• Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
• Python 3.10
• CUDA 11.8
• PyTorch 2.1.0 compatible with CUDA 11.8
B.3.4 Data sets.
• DiffusionDB [link]
• MJHQ-30k [link]
B.3.5 Models.
• Stable Diffusion 3.5 Large [link]
• Stable Diffusion XL [link]
• SANA 1.6B [link]
We use Hugging Face to download and load these models.
Note that Stable Diffusion 3.5 Large is a gated model, and
requires users to request and obtain access approval before
it can be used.
B.4 Installation
Download the MoDM code base from https://github.com/
stsxxx/MoDM.git. Follow the instructions in the README
to install all dependencies and to download the dataset meta-
data, pre-generated cache images, embeddings, and latents.
B.5 Experiment Workflow
1. Install all dependencies.
2. Download and prepare the dataset metadata, as well
as all pre-computed cached images and latents.
3. Run the throughput experiments on MoDM and other
baselines.
4. Compute the image quality metrics.
B.6 Evaluation and expected results
After the experiments complete, all generated images will be
saved under the images directory. The throughput and image
quality results can be found at the end of each corresponding
log file (e.g., MoDM_throughput_diffusionDB_sdxl.txt).
19
B.7 Methodology
Submission, reviewing and badging methodology:
• https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-review-
and-badging-current
• https://cTuning.org/ae
20
Request Prompt SD3.5L SDXL SANA MoDM-SDXL MoDM-SANA
Carlos Sainz Jr.
Horseshoe Bend in Utah
Cinematic National Geographic
Photoshoot
Batman holding up a bitcoin
Joy of human and dog
interation
A sneaker event with a DJ
performing in the middle of the
crowd within foot locker shop
new balance sneakers on
display photorealistic
A village over a tree in atamas
dessert with a lot of vegetation
in the night blue lighting with
HDR cinematic look
Hyperrealistic
A woman sitting on a black
sofa next to her French Bulldog.
The French Bulldog is white.
The walls of the room are
glazed. the room has a view to
the garden
Airport cartoon style pastel
Figure 20. Generated images for different methods on 8 sample requests. MoDM uses SD3.5L as a large model.
21
