vCXLGen: Automated Synthesis and Verification
of CXL Bridges for Heterogeneous Architectures
Anatole Lefort∗
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Julian Pritzi∗
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Nicolò Carpentieri
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
David Schall
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Simon Dittrich
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Soham Chakraborty
TU Delft
Delft, Netherlands
Nicolai Oswald
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, US
Pramod Bhatotia
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
Abstract
Compute Express Link (CXL) offers byte-addressable, cache-
coherent remote memory accesses across multiple hosts. Un-
fortunately,theCXLspecificationlacksmechanismstoensure
safe interoperability between heterogeneous host architectures
with diverse cache coherence (CC) protocols and memory
consistency models (MCMs). This semantic gap poses funda-
mental challenges and a significant barrier to adopting CXL
in modern heterogeneous data centers.
We propose CXL bridges, an abstraction that interposes
between hosts and CXL to reconcile differences in CC proto-
cols and MCMs. We present vCXLGen, the first system that
automatically synthesizes and verifies these CXL bridges. We
make two core contributions: (1) a fully automated approach
to synthesize CXL bridges from machine-readable CC proto-
col specifications, and (2) a compositional formal verification
approach for scalable model-checking of liveness properties.
Our evaluation shows that vCXLGen is general, i.e., it sup-
ports diverse protocols (both SWMR and relaxed consistency)
and is easily extensible when integrating new protocols, such
as CXL.mem. Our performance evaluations indicate that syn-
thesised bridges achieve comparable results to manually de-
signed homogeneous protocols. Finally, for correctness, our
formalverificationrigorouslyprovesthesafetyandlivenessof
synthesized bridges, all while achieving significant scalability
in liveness verification of complex heterogeneous systems.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Ar-
chitectures; • Hardware → Emerging technologies.
∗Authors contributed equally.
ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0International
License.
ASPLOS ’26, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2359-9/2026/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790245
Keywords: Cache, coherence; CXL; Disaggregated, systems
ACM Reference Format:
Anatole Lefort, Julian Pritzi, Nicolò Carpentieri, David Schall, Si-
mon Dittrich, Soham Chakraborty, Nicolai Oswald, and Pramod
Bhatotia. 2026. vCXLGen: Automated Synthesis and Verification
of CXL Bridges for Heterogeneous Architectures. In Proceedings of
the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS
’26), March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790245
1 Introduction
Modern data centers are increasingly heterogeneous, employ-
ing diverse CPUs (x86, Arm, RISC-V) and accelerators (GPUs,
FPGAs, TPUs) for performance, power efficiency, domain-
specific computing, and license requirements [9, 40, 60]. This
architectural diversity necessitates a standardized intercon-
nect for sharing data across architectures.
Compute Express Link (CXL) [31, 34, 43] has emerged as
a promising industry standard, offering efficient, low-latency,
byte-addressable memory access. The latest iteration, CXL
v3.0 [31, 46], introduces a pivotal advancement: hardware-
enforced cache coherence across multiple hosts, which paves
the way for high-performance distributed shared memory
(DSM)byeliminatingthecomplexitiesofsoftware-basedsolu-
tions. A boon for developing distributed systems [33, 53, 63].
Unfortunately, the CXL v3.0 specification lacks inherent
mechanisms to guarantee safe interoperability across het-
erogeneous host architectures, creating a significant obsta-
cle for hardware-coherent DSM in heterogeneous environ-
ments: the semantic gap between varied, vendor-specific
cache coherence (CC) protocols and memory consistency
models (MCMs) [2, 13, 45, 62] that prevents combining di-
verse architectures and impedes broader CXL adoption.
This semantic gap manifests in two key dimensions. Firstly,
itstemsfromtheinherentdifferencesbetweendiversevendor-
specificCCprotocolsandtheCXL-definedprotocol(CXL.mem).
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Anatole Lefort et al.
To enable multi-host coherence, hardware vendors must inte-
grateCXL.memwiththeirarchitecture-specificCCprotocols—
deeply ingrained in their processor design, optimized for
their specific memory subsystem, and not initially intended
for external interoperability. Secondly, vendors hold varying
perspectives on MCMs: some enforce Single-Writer Multiple-
Reader (SWMR) [10, 13, 45] while others support relaxed
memory consistency [6, 7, 62]. These heterogeneous models
introduce programmability challenges when diverse hosts
access shared memory regions via CXL [38].
To systematically address these challenges, we introduce
the concept of a CXL bridge: an abstraction interposing be-
tween a host and the CXL interconnect. This bridge orches-
trates the existing host and CXL fabric CC protocols trans-
parently, propagating requests and responses bidirectionally
between them without requiring any modifications to either
protocol. Our vision is a drop-in component that enables
seamless CXL integration for any host system, encapsulat-
ing the complexity required for correct interoperation while
preserving each host’s native CC protocols and MCMs. From
the CXL perspective, each bridged host appears as a standard
CXL device, while the host operating system views the CXL
memory as a conventional NUMA node or DAX device [55].
Realizing an effective CXL bridge entails addressing five
key requirements: (1) Generality to support diverse host archi-
tectures (CCs, MCMs) without requiring disruptive changes.
(2) Automated synthesis to eliminate the error-prone manual
process of translating protocol states and transitions. (3) Well-
defined memory consistency for the integrated system, pro-
viding predictable programmability semantics despite under-
lyinghostMCMvariations.(4)Correctnessthroughformalver-
ification,toensureprogress(liveness)andadherencetothede-
fined MCMs (safety). (5) Performance to fulfill CXL’s promise
of low-latency and transparent remote memory access.
To meet these requirements, we present vCXLGen, the
first system for the automated and correct-by-construction
synthesis of CXL bridges. vCXLGen takes as input the proto-
col specifications for both the local (host-specific) and global
(CXL) CC protocols, expressed in the ProtoGen DSL [66]. It
then generates comprehensive specifications for the merged
system-wide coherence protocol. Notably, vCXLGen tackles
three key challenges: (1) Protocol combination complexity by
automating the intricate process of identifying propagation
requirements, semantic translation, and request linearization
across heterogeneous protocols. (2) Verification scalability by
employing a novel compositional approach that leverages the
modularity of multi-host systems to enable rigorous verifica-
tion of complex real-world scenarios, overcoming the state-
space explosion [67, 68]. (3) Performance evaluation by pro-
viding a gem5 simulator backend, creating the first testbed for
evaluating CXL bridges in heterogeneous multi-host settings.
OurevaluationdemonstratestheeffectivenessofvCXLGen
acrossseveralkeydimensions.Regardinggenerality,vCXLGen
successfully synthesizes CXL bridges for various cache co-
herence protocols, including those adhering to SWMR and
relaxed consistency models. We validate their functionality
by running 35 parallel applications from three benchmark
suites (PARSEC [1], Phoenix [71], and SPLASH [39]) and a
distributed KVS using YSCB workloads [32]. Regarding ex-
tensibility, the modular design of our system allows for the
straightforward addition of new protocols, as evidenced by
relatively concise specifications for the new CXL.mem pro-
tocol [31]. For performance, we show that the automatically
generated bridges achieve comparable performance to opti-
mized homogeneous protocols. Finally, regarding verification,
we show safety using model-checking and present a novel
compositionalapproachthatverifieslivenesspropertieswhile
achieving significant scalability in complex system models.
Overall, our paper makes two core contributions:
(1) Automated synthesis of CXL bridges: We present a
generic and automated approach for combining coherence
protocols with CXL. This is realized through vCXLGen, a
generator synthesizing CXL bridges directly from protocol
specifications. Leveraging vCXLGen, we generate a diverse
set of CXL bridges tailored for various CC protocols and archi-
tectures. Furthermore, we develop a custom gem5 backend,
establishing the first simulation testbed capable of evaluating
CXL multi-host coherence with our generated bridges.
(2) Automated verification of CXL bridges: We formally
verify that generated CXL bridges preserve local MCMs and
guarantee progress. With vCXLGen, we generate system
models for the Mur𝜑 and Rumur model checkers. We use 216
litmus tests to characterize the MCM of various CXL multi-
host systems integrating our bridges, and verify that each
thread always adheres to its local MCMs axioms. Last, we in-
troducecompositionallivenesschecks:anovelautomatedver-
ification technique that scales to complex multi-host systems.
2 Background
CXL systems. Compute Express Link (CXL) [30, 31] is an
open interconnect standard designed for high-speed, efficient
communications between host processors and devices like
accelerators, GPUs or memory expanders [43]. CXL defines
two cache coherence protocols: CXL.cache and CXL.mem.
The CXL.mem protocol provides hosts with transparent and
coherent access to device-attached memory [43], presented
as a physical memory mapping [79]. With CXL version 3.0,
the specification defines how multiple hosts can coherently
access the same shared CXL memory, through device-to-host
invalidation flows BISnp{Inv,Data}. The hardware imple-
menting CXL.mem protocol must, in turn, ensure that host
caches are kept consistent. Namely, the specification man-
dates that the Home Agent (HA), a component responsible
for enforcing cache coherence on the host [31], is extended
to allow CXL.mem to affect host caches. This extension of the
HA effectively bridges the host’s CC protocol and CXL.mem.
