TreeVQA: A Tree-Structured Execution Framework for
Shot Reduction in Variational Quantum Algorithms
Yuewen Hou
isaachyw@umich.edu
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Dhanvi Bharadwaj
dhanvib@umich.edu
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Gokul Subramanian Ravi
gsravi@umich.edu
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Abstract
Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) are promising for
near- and intermediate-term quantum computing, but their
execution cost is substantial. Each task requires many iter-
ations and numerous circuits per iteration, and real-world
applications often involve multiple tasks, scaling with the
precision needed to explore the application’s energy land-
scape. This demands an enormous number of execution shots,
making practical use prohibitively expensive.
We observe that VQA costs can be significantly reduced
by exploiting execution similarities across an application’s
tasks. Based on this insight, we propose TreeVQA1, a tree-
based execution framework that begins by executing tasks
jointly and progressively branches only as their quantum
executions diverge.
Implemented as a VQA wrapper, TreeVQA integrates with
typical VQA applications. Evaluations on scientific and com-
binatorial benchmarks show shot count reductions of 25.9×
on average and over 100× for large-scale problems at the
same target accuracy. The benefits grow further with increas-
ing problem size and precision requirements.
1 Introduction
Quantum computers are gradually transitioning from near-
term noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) systems [49],
which feature at most a few hundred qubits with limited co-
herence times and high gate error rates, to intermediate-term
Early Fault- Tolerant (EFT) systems [23, 30], expected to host
thousands of qubits and employ limited forms of quantum
error correction to reduce error rates. These systems will
be unable to run long-term quantum applications [25, 59],
which demand millions of qubits, full fault tolerance, and
the ability to execute billions of quantum operations [47].
Despite these limitations, the community remains optimistic
that near- and intermediate-term devices can deliver prac-
tically useful quantum advantage in key domains such as
optimization [15], physics [36], and chemistry [48].
One promising class of algorithms with potential feasibil-
ity and utility before full fault tolerance is Variational Quan-
tum Algorithms (VQAs). Their inherent robustness [65] to
noise allows them to deliver useful results even without full-
fledged quantum error correction. VQAs have broad appli-
cability, including estimating the energies of molecules [48]
1TreeVQA is open source at https://github.com/isaachyw/TreeVQA.
VQA Application: One or more VQA tasks forming solution landscape
VQA Task & Task Hamiltonian:
Task solved using VQA, represented by Hamiltonian
Hamiltonian Pauli Strings & Circuits:
Hamiltonian decomposed into commuting sets,
each mapped to circuit
VQA Iteration:
One ansatz parameter update +
execution of all circuits for the task Hamiltonian
Figure 1. Key terminologies and their relations.
and approximating solutions to optimization problems such
as MaxCut [15]. These hybrid algorithms combine a quantum
circuit with parameterized angles (ansatz) with a classical
optimizer. Through an iterative feedback loop, the VQA ex-
plores the solution space and converges to the problem’s
“ground state”, representing the optimal solution.
Before delving into VQA details and our proposed work,
we introduce key terminology for context: (i) VQA Appli-
cation: An application typically composed of one or more
VQA tasks. When multiple tasks are involved, their solutions
are combined to construct a solution landscape relevant to
the application; (ii) VQA Task and Task Hamiltonian: A VQA
task is solved using a VQA to find its ground-state solution
and is mathematically represented by a Hamiltonian; (iii)
Hamiltonian Pauli String and Circuit: For a specific VQA task,
its Hamiltonian consists of multiple Pauli strings, which can
be grouped into sets that fully commute within a set but not
across sets. Each set corresponds to a quantum circuit (using
the same ansatz but different measurement bases); (iv) VQA
Iteration: For a specific VQA task, this is a single instance
of ansatz parameter updates, as determined by the classical
optimizer, followed by the execution of circuits associated
with the task Hamiltonian. Fig.1 illustrates this terminology.
While VQAs hold promise, their execution faces signifi-
cant hurdles, the most critical being the enormous number of
‘shots’ (executions) required for any real-world application.
1
arXiv:2512.12068v2
[quant-ph]
19
Dec
2025
Yuewen Hou, Dhanvi Bharadwaj, and Gokul Subramanian Ravi
Objective
Objective
Execution Shots Execution Shots
(a) Conventional VQA
independent task execution,
each consuming many shots
(b) TreeVQA
shared execution reduces
total shots for similar tasks
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
Branching
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
(a)
H1, H2, H3….. H8
[HL1B1]
H1, H2, H3
[HL2B1]
H4, H6, H7….. H8
[HL2B2]
H5, H6
[HL3B1]
H7, H8
[HL3B2]
H8
[HLnB8]
H7
[HLnB7]
H6
[HLnB6]
H5
[HLnB5]
H4
[HLnB4]
H3
[HLnB3]
H2
[HLnB2]
H1
[HLnB1]
T1 iterations
T2 iterations
T3 iterations
Tn iterations
(b)
Figure 2. (a) Comparing the iterative execution of conventional VQA and TreeVQA. (b) TreeVQA strategy overview, branching
from the root node to multiple leaf nodes for an eight-VQA task application.
This challenge arises from three factors: a VQA tasks are
inherently iterative, often requiring thousands of iterations
to explore the solution landscape of complex quantum prob-
lems, a process further complicated by device noise; b For
practical applications such as chemistry, task Hamiltonians
contain thousands of Pauli terms, resulting in a large number
of circuits per iteration; and c While the above challenges
were associated with individual tasks, real-world applica-
tions typically comprise thousands of VQA tasks, whose
collective ground states define the application’s solution
landscape. Together, these factors drive the total number of
circuit executions into the billions for practical VQA applica-
tions, making time and resource costs a show-stopper.
Prior research, both specific to VQA and otherwise, has
contributed to both reducing and exacerbating total shot
costs, depending on their primary goal. For instance, on
the one hand, classical initialization methods [51, 57, 58]
can help reduce the number of VQA iterations, although
their success is often limited and problem dependent. On the
other hand, error mitigation strategies such as ZNE [19, 34],
PEC [3], measurement error mitigation [13], and more, all
enormously increase the shot counts. The key takeaway is
that, despite prior strategies or because of them, the cost of
execution shots is still extremely high and deserves attention.
In this work, we make the novel observation that many
VQA tasks within an application are highly similar. In par-
ticular, the solutions to these tasks (i.e., the quantum states
corresponding to their ground states) often exhibit signif-
icant overlap. The key idea is that, while these solutions
are distinct enough to require individual evaluation for con-
structing the high-precision solution landscape demanded by
the application, their substantial overlaps create an opportu-
nity to share quantum executions across tasks as they iterate
toward their respective solutions. By reusing large portions
of the VQA process, the total cost of quantum execution can
be reduced dramatically.
Based on this insight, we propose TreeVQA, a tree-based
execution framework that begins by executing all application
VQA tasks as a single (or minimal set of) quantum executions.
These executions then gradually branch into multiple distinct
paths as the quantum states produced by the VQA process
converge toward each task’s solution. A comparison of the
iterative execution in TreeVQA and conventional VQA is
illustrated in Fig.2a. In TreeVQA, multiple VQA tasks from
an application (five in the figure: 𝑇1 - 𝑇5) begin by executing
as a single entity and then eventually diverge. Dissimilar
tasks branch out earlier, while similar tasks stick together
until closer to convergence. In comparison, the execution
cost is much greater for conventional VQA, which executes
all of these tasks entirely individually.
The tree execution strategy employed by TreeVQA is more
specifically illustrated in Fig.2b, which shows an example
application with eight VQA tasks (with Hamiltonians 𝐻1 to
𝐻8). Their quantum state evolutions are initially captured
by a single representative Hamiltonian, 𝐻𝐿1𝐵1, which forms
the tree root. After 𝑇1 VQA iterations, TreeVQA decides to
split into two branches based on execution similarity. After
the split, 𝐻𝐿2𝐵1 is the representative Hamiltonian for the
first three tasks, and 𝐻𝐿2𝐵2 is for the remaining five. This
branching continues until all tasks eventually execute inde-
pendently and converge to their respective solutions. The
benefit of TreeVQA lies in the shared executions across all
internal tree levels prior to the leaf nodes, with the greatest
savings occurring near the root. Further details that justify
this approach are presented in Section 4 and beyond.
The primary contributions and insights are:
1. We make the novel observation that substantial reductions
in quantum resource costs are possible by exploiting exe-
cution commonalities across multiple related VQA tasks
within a single quantum application, an opportunity over-
looked in prior work.
2
