RTeAAL Sim: Using Tensor Algebra to Represent and
Accelerate RTL Simulation (Extended Version)
Yan Zhu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
zhuyan14@berkeley.edu
Boru Chen
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
boruchen@berkeley.edu
Christopher W. Fletcher
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
cwfletcher@berkeley.edu
Nandeeka Nayak
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
nandeeka@berkeley.edu
Abstract
RTL simulation on CPUs remains a persistent bottleneck
in hardware design. State-of-the-art simulators embed the
circuit directly into the simulation binary, resulting in long
compilation times and execution that is fundamentally CPU
frontend-bound, with severe instruction-cache pressure.
This work proposes RTeAAL Sim, which reformulates RTL
simulation as a sparse tensor algebra problem. By represent-
ing RTL circuits as tensors and simulation as a sparse tensor
algebra kernel, RTeAAL Sim decouples simulation behavior
from binary size and makes RTL simulation amenable to well-
studied tensor algebra optimizations. We demonstrate that a
prototype of our tensor-based simulator, even with a subset
of these optimizations, already mitigates the compilation
overhead and frontend pressure and achieves performance
competitive with the highly optimized Verilator simulator
across multiple CPUs and ISAs.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Hardware description
languages and compilation.
Keywords: RTL simulation; Tensor algebra
1 Introduction
Efficient development and verification of hardware designs
requires fast and accurate Register-Transfer-Level (RTL) sim-
ulation. While hardware-accelerated RTL simulation tools
exist, they are expensive to acquire [5] and/or incur long com-
pilation times for each new design [33]. As a result, software-
based RTL simulators that run on CPUs [15, 35, 56, 62, 63, 67]
remain widely used in both academia and industry.
Modern high-performance RTL simulators [15, 56, 62, 63]
for CPUs translate hardware designs expressed in hardware
description languages (HDLs) into nearly straight-line C++
programs, which are compiled into executable binaries us-
ing off-the-shelf C++ compilers. This approach introduces
inefficiencies at both compilation and simulation time.
During compilation, increasing the design’s size leads to
more generated C++ code and a larger eventual binary. Large
C++ programs require substantial compilation time and mem-
ory, especially under aggressive optimization settings (e.g.,
clang -O3).
During simulation, the resulting binary exhibits low code
reuse, placing heavy pressure on the instruction cache and
creating frequent processor stalls at instruction fetch. This
frontend bottleneck is fundamental, as these simulators rely
on straight-line code to maximize the effectiveness of con-
ventional compiler optimizations.
Conversely, tensor algebra expresses computation through
a compact loop-based representation, offering an alterna-
tive to large, statically-generated instruction sequences.
The resulting smaller binaries naturally reduce compila-
tion cost while improving code reuse, which in turn allevi-
ates instruction-cache pressure during simulation. Moreover,
the tensor algebra community has developed a rich body
of well-established techniques, such as tensor compression
and loop transformations. These optimizations further re-
duce instruction footprint, improve memory locality and
data reuse, and balance instruction- and data-cache pres-
sure [7, 18, 34, 37, 40, 49, 53, 55, 60].
This work. Following the above observations, we propose
RTeAAL Sim—a reformulation of RTL simulation as a tensor
algebra problem. The core idea is to express the RTL dataflow
graph as a sparse tensor and its execution as a cascade of
extended Einsums—a sequence of tensor algebraic equations
involving the dataflow graph tensor and other tensors, aug-
mented with user-defined operators [51].
To optimize the RTeAAL Sim formulation, we leverage
TeAAL [49], a framework for analyzing, scheduling, and op-
timizing sparse tensor algebra kernels. TeAAL employs a
methodology based on a separation-of-concerns that distin-
guishes the cascade (algorithm), mapping (dataflow), format
(tensor layout), and binding (hardware allocation). In this
work, we primarily focus on optimizing sparse tensor stor-
age formats (format level) [18] and code transformations like
loop unrolling [16] (binding level). To highlight the gener-
ality and adaptability of RTeAAL Sim, we map prior RTL
simulation optimizations to TeAAL’s abstractions. In sum,
1
arXiv:2601.18140v1
[cs.AR]
26
Jan
2026
Yan Zhu, Boru Chen, Christopher W. Fletcher, and Nandeeka Nayak
we show that RTeAAL Sim ameliorates traditional bottle-
necks in RTL simulation, preserves bespoke optimizations
used in RTL simulators today and enables new opportunities
for optimization.
To demonstrate that RTeAAL Sim is practical, we imple-
ment and evaluate a simulator that incorporates its ideas.
The simulator takes an RTL design described in FIRRTL and
generates the corresponding tensors and a sparse tensor
algebra kernel for performing RTL simulation. Although
this simulator is a proof-of-concept and implements only a
subset of potential optimizations, we show that it alleviates
bottlenecks from prior work and is simulation performance-
competitive with the popular simulator Verilator. These re-
sults demonstrate the potential of our approach.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:
• We propose RTeAAL Sim, a reformulation of RTL sim-
ulation as a tensor algebra problem that can incorpo-
rate a wide range of tensor algebra optimizations.
• We use TeAAL to optimize the RTeAAL Sim formu-
lation. To demonstrate generality, we taxonomize
bespoke RTL simulation optimizations in terms of
TeAAL’s separation of concerns.
• We design and evaluate a concrete instance of RTeAAL
Sim that leverages a subset of potential optimizations.
This proof-of-concept simulator achieves performance
that is competitive with Verilator across four host
machines. We open-source our codebase on GitHub1.
2 Background
2.1 RTL Simulation
RTL simulation models the behavior of digital circuits at
the cycle level and captures how data flows between regis-
ters and combinational logic (CL). During simulation, inputs
specified in testbenches are applied to the design, and signal
values are computed and propagated through the circuit.
As Figure 1 shows, software simulators typically compile
the RTL design (left) into a dataflow graph (middle), whose
nodes represent primitive operations, and edges represent
data flow. This graph is then translated into C++ (right) for
compilation and execution.
RTL simulators can broadly be classified into two
paradigms based on activity-awareness: event-driven [17,
22, 35, 65, 67] or full-cycle [14, 15, 23, 28, 62, 63] simulation.
Event-driven simulators dynamically schedule evaluation
of nodes in the dataflow graph when inputs to those nodes
are updated; i.e., they are activity-aware. In contrast, full-
cycle simulators produce a static schedule at compile time,
which is used to evaluate the circuit at runtime; i.e., they
are activity-oblivious. Full-cycle simulators often perform
better because they eliminate the overheads associated with
tracking which nodes need to be re-evaluated [14, 15]. For
this reason, we focus on full-cycle simulation in this work.
1https://github.com/TAC-UCB/RTeAAL-Sim
Input reg [7:0] reg1, reg2, reg3;
always @(posedge clk)
begin
reg1 <= reg1 + reg2;
reg2 <= (reg1 + reg2) &
(reg2 – reg3);
reg3 <= (reg2 – reg3);
end
Reg 1 Reg 2 Reg 3
Reg 1 Reg 2 Reg 3
+ −
&
uint8_t reg1_next = reg1 + reg2;
uint8_t reg2_next = (reg1 + reg2)
& (reg2 - reg3);
uint8_t reg3_next = reg2 - reg3;
reg1 = reg1_next;
reg2 = reg2_next;
reg3 = reg3_next;
Figure 1. Workflow for CPU- and compilation–based
RTL simulation. The RTL of a synchronous circuit (left)
is lowered onto a dataflow graph (middle) capturing
the next-state logic. The simulator then compiles this
graph into explicit C++ code (right) to compute and
commit register next states each cycle.
2 3
1
4
0 1 2
0
1
2
Rank
M
Rank K
2 0 1 2
1 2 3 4
0 2
R
Rank M
Rank K
Fiber for Rank M
Point
𝐴!,#
Leaf payloads
Fiber for Rank K
Matrix A Fibertree notation for Matrix A
Figure 2. A matrix 𝐴 and its fibertree representation.
The matrix has two ranks, row rank 𝑀 and column
rank 𝐾. 𝐴0,2 is an element at point (0, 2) with scalar
value 1. In the fibertree view, rank 𝑀 contains a single
fiber of shape 3 with occupancy 2, while rank 𝐾 con-
tains two fibers with occupancies 1 and 3, respectively,
both with shape 3. The leaf payloads correspond to the
scalar values stored in the matrix.
2.2 Tensors and Fibertrees
In this paper, we adopt the tensor algebra notation defined
in Sze et al. [60]:
• Rank: an axis/dimension of a tensor. For example, a
matrix has two ranks (rows and columns).
• Point: a location in a tensor with a scalar value, iden-
tified by a tuple of coordinates. For example, 𝐴𝑚,𝑘
denotes tensor 𝐴’s element at point (𝑚,𝑘).
Mathematically, tensors have no notion of sparsity or com-
pression format (e.g., CSR). To avoid getting bogged down in
the details of various formats, we use the following abstrac-
tions proposed in Sze et al. [60] (see Figure 2 for illustration):
• Fibertree: a tree representation of a tensor with levels
corresponding to ranks. Each level contains fibers.
• Fiber: a set of (coordinate, payload) pairs sharing
higher-level coordinates.
• Payload: a scalar value when it is leaf or a reference to
the next-level fiber when it is an intermediate node.
• Shape: the number of all possible coordinates in a fiber,
regardless of whether those coordinates correspond
to empty payloads. The shape of a rank equals that
of its fibers. We use the same symbol (e.g., 𝑀) for the
name and shape of a rank.
2
