CounterPoint: Using Hardware Event Counters to
Refute and Refine Microarchitectural Assumptions
Extended Version
Nick Lindsay
Yale University, USA
Caroline Trippel
Stanford University, USA
Anurag Khandelwal
Yale University, USA
Abhishek Bhattacharjee
Yale University, USA
Abstract
Hardware event counters offer the potential to reveal not
only performance bottlenecks but also detailed microarchi-
tectural behavior. In practice, this promise is undermined by
their vague specifications, opaque designs, and multiplexing
noise, making event counter data hard to interpret.
We introduce CounterPoint, a framework that tests user-
specified microarchitectural models—expressed as 𝜇path De-
cision Diagrams—for consistency with performance counter
data. When mismatches occur, CounterPoint pinpoints plau-
sible microarchitectural features that could explain them, us-
ing multi-dimensional counter confidence regions to mitigate
multiplexing noise. We apply CounterPoint to the Haswell
Memory Management Unit as a case study, shedding light
on multiple undocumented and underdocumented microar-
chitectural behaviors. These include a load–store queue-side
TLB prefetcher, merging page table walkers, abortable page
table walks, and more.
Overall, CounterPoint helps experts reconcile noisy hard-
ware performance counter measurements with their mental
model of the microarchitecture— uncovering subtle, previ-
ously hidden hardware features along the way.
1 Introduction
Hardware event counters (HECs) are specialized registers em-
bedded in CPUs and hardware accelerators that provide low-
overhead, fine-grained insights into microarchitectural be-
havior during execution. First introduced in the 1980s—most
notably in the DEC VAX and early RISC machines—HECs
were originally designed to support performance tuning and
system-level debugging.
Since then, their role has expanded. While HECs remain
essential for identifying performance bottlenecks [40, 42, 63,
117], they are now also used to calibrate microarchitectural
© Nick Lindsay, Caroline Trippel, Anurag Khandelwal and Abhishek
Bhattacharjee; 2026. This is the extended version of the authors’ version
of The Work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistri-
bution. The definitive version is to be published in Proceedings of the
31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
gramming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’26),
https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790145.
software simulators [58, 95], build analytical models of hard-
ware [4, 8, 63], correlate microarchitectural activity with
power and thermal behavior [27, 56, 59, 62, 97, 118], and
more [1, 2, 9, 36, 86, 111, 119]. As their utility has grown, so
has their prevalence: modern x86-64 processors now expose
thousands of HECs —more than a 10× increase since 2009
(Figure 1a).
The promise of a broad set of HECs. In principle, a rich
set of HECs should allow experts to gain deeper insight into
their mental model of the hardware, even without access to
proprietary RTL or internal documentation. These insights
are crucial for building accurate performance models and
calibrating architectural simulators for future hardware [4,
12, 15, 20, 21, 23, 24, 93], and go beyond traditional HEC uses
that measure only broad performance metrics like CPU and
memory utilization [43, 68, 81, 98, 100, 101, 115].
Address translation provides a prime example. Modern
processors devote many HECs to this function—for instance,
IBM’s Power9 includes 96 HECs dedicated solely to address
translation [55]. Researchers often attempt to leverage these
counters to reverse-engineer address translation hardware,
enabling accurate integration into software simulators and
analytical models of system performance [4, 12, 15, 20, 21, 23,
24, 93]. These models commonly assume specific behavior
for the Paging Directory Entry (PDE) cache, which elimi-
nates memory accesses to non-leaf page table levels during
a walk. It is assumed that the PDE cache is accessed ex-
actly once per page-table walk, implying that the number
of PDE cache misses (load.pde$_miss) should not exceed
page walks (load.causes_walk):
load.pde$_miss ≤ load.causes_walk
Surprisingly, our measurements on Intel Haswell show
that this expected relationship—a sanity check of the expert’s
mental model, which we term a model constraint—does not
always hold. This challenges a widely held assumption in
address translation research and casts doubt on the validity of
much simulation-based work that relies on it. This example
also illustrates two benefits of having a diverse set of HECs.
First, a diverse set of HECs helps detect violations of the
model constraints associated with an expert’s mental model
of the hardware. Here, we can spot the violation only because
1
arXiv:2601.01265v3
[cs.AR]
26
Feb
2026
Nick Lindsay, Caroline Trippel, Anurag Khandelwal, and Abhishek Bhattacharjee
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
Year
103
104
105
Estimated
Event
Count
NHM-EX | 8
WSM-EX | 10
IVT | 15
HSX | 18
KNL | 72
CLX | 56
Counter Scaling
Named
(1 Core)
Addressable
(System-wide)
(a) The estimated number of HECs events in
x86-64 systems increased over 10× between
2009 and 2019. (Y-axis plotted on a log-scale.)
Ret | 4 L2TLB | 10 Walk | 22 Refs | 23 MMU$ | 29
Counter Groups | Total Counters
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
#
Constraints
projected
(+MMU$)
Constraint Scaling
(b) The number of model constraints implied
by a model scales with the number of HECs
used to understand hardware behavior.
12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Counters
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Normalized
Noise
constraint
violation
not detected
Noise Scaling
Effective
page_walker
causes_walk
pde$_miss
(c) HEC measurement noise increases with ac-
tive HECs; beyond a point, model constraint
violations can no longer be reliably detected.
Figure 1. The rapid growth of HECs has increased manual effort to construct and compose model constraints, and amplified
multiplexing noise that obscures constraint violations. (a) The blue line shows the number of documented HEC ‘names’,
assuming a single core. The red line shows the number of ‘addressable’ events after accounting for per-core replication and
the conservative removal of events that, while still documented (and potentially informative), have been deprecated by the
vendor. Each red data point represents a microarchitecture paired with its typical core count in a server system. This graph
shows only documented events and does not include the thousands of additional undocumented HECs identified in recent
work [116]0. (b) The number of model constraints grows superlinearly with the number of HECs (our x-axis shows increasing
HEC count for an Intel Haswell MMU, in steps associated with all the HECs in a logical group; e.g., 10 HECs for L2 TLB events)
and worsens significantly when including hypothetical HECs across all MMU caches (shown in green). (c) For a representative
model constraint on the Intel Haswell MMU ((1) in Table 1), we show that as measurement noise increases—both overall and
for individual HECs —it becomes impossible to determine whether the model constraint is violated with 99% confidence once
19 HECs are active. Here, noise is defined as the standard deviation in the observed HEC values.
Haswell exposes the load.causes_walk HEC —which many
other processors lack. Without it, researchers rely on generic
TLB miss HECs that miss such nuances.
Second, a diverse set of HECs helps explain why a model
constraint is violated, enabling refinement toward a more
accurate representation of the hardware. For example, com-
paring counters for retired TLB misses, PDE cache misses,
and page table walks uncovers two likely undocumented
behaviors: (i) merged walks to the same virtual address oc-
curring after PDE cache lookup, and (ii) aborted translation
requests that terminate after PDE cache lookup but before a
page table walk begins. Without the full set of HECs, these
effects would remain hidden.
The reality of a broad set of HECs. The PDE cache exam-
ple is an ideal case where a diverse set of HECs helps reveal
that there is a flaw in the expert’s original mental model
of the microarchitecture. In practice, however, experts are
rarely able to leverage the full introspective power of HECs
because they rely on manual and ad hoc approaches to doing
so. In particular, they face two challenges:
0We counted the total number of HEC names in the Linux perf counter
database [53, 103] to determine the set of ‘Named’ events per microarchitec-
ture. We estimated the number of ‘Addressable’ events by (i) conservatively
removing deprecated HECs, (ii) distinguishing between core and uncore
HECs, and (iii) accounting for per-core replication. We account for per-core
First, understanding microarchitectural behavior requires
identifying how HECs relate to one another—that is, deter-
mining all the model constraints that observed HEC data
must satisfy to align with an expert’s mental model (i.e.,
their set of assumptions about the microarchitectural imple-
mentation). Our PDE cache model constraint illustrates how
surprisingly difficult it can be to reason about even simple re-
lationships involving just two HECs. As more HECs are used
to check whether observed behavior matches expert expecta-
tions, the number of model constraints grows super-linearly
(Figure 1b). These model constraints become increasingly
complex, often involving dozens of HECs in intricate rela-
tionships that are hard to reason about (Section 2). Manual
approaches to identifying and evaluating model constraints
quickly become intractable. The challenge worsens when ob-
served HEC values violate model constraints, forcing experts
to revise their mental models—and then deduce entirely new,
complex sets of associated model constraints.
Second, modern architectures allow recording thousands
of logical HECs, but these are multiplexed onto a much
smaller number of physical HECs —typically just 4 to 8 at a
time. This means that HEC measurements are approximate
replication by summing together the uncore counters with the number of
core counters multiplied by the typical core count of server systems of that
microarchitecture. We will further explore these trends in future work.
2
