CXLMC: Model Checking CXL Shared Memory
Programs
Yutong Guo
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
yutong4@uci.edu
Conan Truong
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
cjtruong@uci.edu
Brian Demsky
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
bdemsky@uci.edu
Abstract
Compute Express Link (CXL) shared memory is an emerging
industry standard that will allow for cache coherent sharing
of remote memory between many machines. Memory de-
vices will contain large amounts of DRAM that can be shared
by many machines in a CXL cluster. This will enable software
running on clusters of computers to use shared memory to
communicate more efficiently and to share important data
between these machines.
As CXL clusters grow larger, machine failures will be-
come a significant risk. Software will need to tolerate ma-
chine failures. A key challenge is that CXL uses caching
of remote memory to hide latency. If a machine fails be-
fore it has flushed dirty cache lines back to the CXL shared
memory device, the latest stores to those cache lines will
be lost. Data structures have been developed that combine
crash-consistent designs with flush and fence instructions
to ensure that the data structures remain consistent even in
the presence of failures.
However, developing such crash-consistent data struc-
tures is error prone. It is easy to make a design or implemen-
tation error. Such crash consistency errors are hard to detect
with testing. We propose CXLMC, a model checker that sys-
tematically explores crashing executions for the x86-CXL
shared memory platform. We have evaluated CXLMC and
found 24 bugs in 8 applications including 7 new bugs.
1 Introduction
Compute Express Link (CXL) is an open standard for cache-
coherent interconnects [1, 22]. CXL enables multiple ma-
chines to access memory shared by a CXL network-attached
memory device in a cache-coherent fashion. CXL has the
potential to enable new software that leverages multiple ma-
chines to efficiently compute on shared data. It also enables
multiple machines to efficiently share one copy of a large
dataset. CXL has started to attract the interest of the systems
research community and several researchers have proposed
using clusters of CXL connected machines, or CXL Pods [87],
to implement more efficient database systems [36, 39, 40, 51]
and key value stores [67].
CXL 3.2 is designed to support cache coherent sharing
between up to 4,095 memory entities. With larger clusters,
machine failures will inevitably occur. Clusters will contain
both memory nodes and compute nodes. We expect that
there will be fewer memory nodes and thus they will have
a lower risk of failure. Compute nodes, on the other hand,
will be more common, and thus there will be a higher risk
that one fails.
Software applications will need to tolerate the failure of
one or more compute nodes. The first challenge is that a
compute node failure stops the execution of the program on
that node, and software must tolerate this. However, caches
bring additional challenges for tolerating failures. If a failed
compute node has written to a cache line, it is possible that
the only copy of those stores resided in the cache of the
failed compute node. While CXL has a mechanism, global
persistent flush (GPF), for flushing the machine’s cache, GPF
is primarily targeted towards power outages. GPF does not
address a wide range of other potential failures such as a
power supply, motherboard, or CXL transceiver failure.
Persistent memory (PM) systems have similar challenges
with failures. However, there are significant differences be-
tween failures in CXL shared memory and PM. First, we
expect partial failures in which one compute node fails to
be the primary concern for CXL shared memory systems,
whereas PM systems have a complete failure model. Second,
CXL systems know which cache lines were lost due to the
cache coherence directory structure. Recovery procedures
can potentially leverage this information. The partial fail-
ure mode can complicate recovery. Operations on persistent
memory structures can assume that any failures have oc-
curred before the operation starts. For CXL memory, failures
can occur concurrently with running data structure opera-
tions and those operations may need recovery code to handle
concurrent failures. For example, a machine may fail while
another machine is running recovery code for a previous
failure, a scenario that is not possible for PM systems.
Developing crash-consistent code can be difficult. A key
lesson from earlier work on building crash-consistent per-
sistent memory applications is that developing correct
crash-consistent code is very difficult. Early work on crash-
consistent persistent memory data structures was largely
done without tool support. Later, researchers developed sev-
eral tools [2, 24, 27, 31, 33, 47, 54, 55, 61] for finding crash-
consistency bugs in persistent memory programs. Devel-
oping crash-consistent software without tool support has
proven to be bug prone. Between these tools, they have found
1
Yutong Guo, Conan Truong, and Brian Demsky
183 crash-consistency bugs in a relatively small number of
benchmark applications.
The CXL shared memory standard is new, and the hard-
ware is not commercially available and thus has not yet been
used in real systems. Existing information suggests that the
amount of shared memory CXL systems support may be
limited [39–41]. Early work suggests that CXL shared mem-
ory may find use in data structures used for coordination
between machines and core index structures. There are on-
going efforts from both industry and academia to implement
key shared data structures using CXL shared memory, in-
cluding database indices [36, 39, 40, 51], message buffers
for cross-node communication [8, 56, 57], and shared object
stores [63, 72]. Note that a single machine crash could cor-
rupt these core data structures, stopping an entire cluster of
machines.
In this work, we present a model checker that enables
efficiently checking for crash consistency of x86-CXL shared
memory programs using a constraint-based approach; the
constraint-based approach was originally developed by prior
work on model checking persistent memory programs [33].
Differences between the CXL and PM failure and consistency
models mean that this approach is not directly applicable.
We have extended the constraint-based approach to handle
the CXL memory failure and consistency models. In partic-
ular, our model checker is able to emulate x86-CXL shared
memory programs running across multiple compute nodes,
as well as the partial failure of any subset of compute nodes.
Supporting these requirements efficiently requires innova-
tions in both algorithm design and implementation.
We introduce CXLMC, the first model checker for crash-
consistency bugs for CXL shared memory. While CXL is
intended to be cross-platform, our work focuses on CXL
shared memory using x86 machines. This paper makes the
following contributions:
• Adapting constraint-based model checking to
CXL shared memory: Constraint-based model
checking approaches must be modified because CXL
shared memory has a partial failure model, in which in-
dividual machines can fail during the execution while
others continue. CXL shared memory also has a dif-
ferent consistency model—remote reads ensure that
cache lines have been written to the backing storage.
• Multi-process support: Model checking CXL shared
memory requires novel implementation techniques
as CXL shared memory programs will have multiple
processes that all have access to a common shared
memory region. Prior model checkers do not support
this multi-process model.
• Implementation: We develop CXLMC to imple-
ment our model checking algorithm. CXLMC uses
the LLVM compiler to instrument C and C++ CXL
programs.
• Evaluation: We have evaluated CXLMC on a set
of benchmarks. These benchmarks consist of the
RECIPE [49] persistent memory benchmarks that have
been adapted for use with CXL shared memory as well
as programs from CXL-SHM [85].
2 Background
In this section, we provide an overview of the relevant CXL
protocols and the TSO memory model.
2.1 Compute Express Link
Compute Express Link (CXL) features a suite of interconnect
protocols for low-latency remote memory accesses between
host and device machines. The CXL.mem protocol [66] gives
a host the ability to access the attached device memory at
cache line granularity with cache coherence guarantees. Ad-
ditionally, in the CXL 3.0 standard, multiple hosts share a sin-
gle CXL memory pool by mapping it into their address space
and accessing the memory concurrently and coherently, en-
abling applications to use CXL memory as distributed shared
memory [36, 85]. Although there is currently no implemen-
tation of CXL 3.0 in hardware, emulation is possible through
other means, such as having multiple NUMA nodes share a
CXL-enabled device [85].
2.2 Memory Model
Our tool implements the x86-TSO memory model with the
addition of cache line flush instructions. We based the prop-
erties of the memory instructions on prior formalizations
of the x86 persistent memory semantics [18, 43, 64], and in
particular, the 𝑃𝑥86𝑠𝑖𝑚 model [64]. Currently, there is no
definite standard on the CXL memory model beyond cache
coherence, and we chose this design based on discussions
with Intel engineers who confirmed that hardware cache-
coherent CXL memory is intended to support the TSO model.
Although the CXL standard is intended to be cross platform,
the exact memory semantics will depend on the underlying
machines. We chose to focus our efforts on x86 as many
of the available benchmarks [49, 85] assume the x86 archi-
tecture. We note that although CXL enables machines with
different memory models to coherently share memory, we do
not consider such scenarios, as the memory model for such
cases remains unclear. In contrast, CXL0 [10], an abstract
model for the CXL protocol layer, includes operations like a
remote store that currently have no x86 mapping, and thus
is not supported by CXLMC. If subtle differences are discov-
ered between the eventual implementations and the expected
failure semantics and memory model, we expect that our
approach is general enough to support these variations with
small changes. Figure 1 shows a representation of the target
memory model of our tool, namely multiple machines with
x86-TSO memory model sharing CXL memory.
2
