Generic Tagging for RISC-V Binaries
David Demicco, Matthew Cole, Gokturk Yuksek, Ravi Theja Gollapudi, Aravind Prakash,
Kanad Ghose and Zerksis Umrigar
Department of Computer Science
State University of New York at Binghamton
Binghamton, New York, USA
{ddemicc1,mcole8,gokturk,rgollap1,aprakash,ghose,umrigar}@binghamton.edu
Abstract—With the widespread popularity of RISC-V – an
open-source ISA – custom hardware security solutions tar-
geting specific defense needs are gaining popularity. These
solutions often require specialized compilers that can insert
metadata (called tags) into the generated binaries, and/or
extend the RISC-V ISA with new instructions. Developing such
compilers can be a tedious and time-consuming process. In
this paper, we present COGENT, a generic instruction tag
generator for RISC-V architecture. COGENT is capable of
associating a tag of configurable and varying widths (1 to 20
bits) to each instruction. It is also capable of emitting labels
that are central to the implementation of control-flow integrity
(CFI) solutions. COGENT encodes all tags and labels as nop
instructions thereby providing full backward compatibility.
We evaluate COGENT on a subset of programs from the
SPEC CPU2017 benchmark suite and report the binary size
increase to be 29.3% and 18.27% for the lowest and highest tag
coverage levels respectively. Additionally, we executed tagged
programs on Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) RISC-V
unmodified hardware and found the execution time overhead
(w.r.t. backward compatibility) to be 13.4% and 5.72% for the
lowest and highest coverage levels respectively. Finally, using
a case study, we present possible use case scenarios where
COGENT can be applied.
1. Introduction
Over the years, the advent of Internet of Things (IoT)
along with an increasing number of mobile, desktop and
server systems has led to a steady increase in cybersecurity
attacks. Most of the attacks–even those targeted at the
hardware (e.g. Spectre [1], and Meltdown [2]) are initiated
through software.
The defense community has focused efforts at different
layers of deployments. For instance, the software community
has explored software-only defenses such as StackGuard
[3], and CFI via program instrumentation (e.g., [4]–[6]).
Meanwhile, the hardware community has pursued defenses
that leverage hardware features in order to detect and flag
exploits (e.g., Intel CET [7], WˆX) or prevent information
leakage (e.g., Intel SGX [8], ARM TrustZone [9]).
While software-only security measures are highly desir-
able and can be deployed with little effort, they typically
suffer higher performance penalties compared to hardware
solutions. Furthermore, the security mechanisms themselves
may be a part of the attack surface, which brings about
transparency issues. On the other hand, hardware-only se-
curity mechanisms must bridge the semantic gap problem
and recover high-level security-relevant program semantics
in order to enforce rich and expressive policy abstractions.
Further, the tolerance for errors is low and “fixing” design
errors is very expensive (e.g. Intel MPX [10], [11] had
problems that resulted in eventual deprecation).
With the gaining popularity of RISC-V, an open-source
ISA, hardware - software cohesive defenses have gained
center stage and are desirable. Typically, defenders take
advantage of (a) fine-grained control over the RISC-V
hardware including (but not limited to) changes to ISA in
combination with (b) curated compilers capable of enrich-
ing binaries with security metadata/stubs, deploying highly
effective and fast performing defenses. For example, re-
cent defenses such as Cheri [12], Zero [13], RetTag [14],
Framer [15], etc., all rely on a dedicated compiler that can
generate instrumented binaries for their modified hardware.
The modified binaries contain metadata called “tags” that
provides the hardware with specific information regarding
the code or data unit in the program. Typically, there is
a one-to-one mapping between a tag and corresponding
code/data unit. These defenses strike a balance between
security and performance requirements and are often tailor-
made to deployment needs. They rely on performant com-
pilers and/or hardware design and engineering, yet compiler
development remains an expensive process often requiring
several hundred developer-hours for development and test-
ing. More importantly, availability of a suitable compiler
would attract more hardware defenses that are currently
impeded by the lack of a compiler. Solutions that shorten
the development effort and allow quick incorporation of
metadata into binaries are missing and highly sought after.
In this paper, we address the above need and present CO-
GENT: COmpiler for GENeric Tagging, a generic LLVM-
based compiler that incorporates instruction tags (or code
metadata) into RISC-V binaries. In essence, COGENT re-
moves the burden of compiler development from RISC-
arXiv:2212.05614v1
[cs.CR]
11
Dec
2022
V hardware defenses that rely on embedding instruction
metadata into binaries. Motivated by the needs of Control-
Flow Integrity (CFI) defenses that embed CFI labels into
code, COGENT interleaves tag metadata into the instruction
stream. COGENT has several key features that make it
highly favorable for hardware-software cohesive defenses.
First, it is highly flexible. It can accommodate various tag
widths (1 to 20 bits per instruction). This flexibility is
essential in order to achieve rich expressiveness in tags.
Second, it is functionally correct. That is, it ensures that
the inserted tags do not interfere with program logic. Func-
tional correctness is non-trivial due to several challenges
(see Section 3.2). This is important since a tag system
is not usable without such guarantees. Third, COGENT
preserves backward compatibility. That is, tagged binaries
will seamlessly run on generic RISC-V processors that are
tag-unaware. We accomplish backward compatibility by en-
coding tag information into NOP instructions that are simply
ignored by unsupported hardware. Finally, our changes are
segregated into LLVM IR-level and target-specific changes.
Other architectures (e.g., ARM) can be supported by reusing
the IR-specific changes and rewriting ARM LLVM backend.
We make the following contributions:
• We implement a flexible and defense-scheme agnos-
tic implementation codenamed COGENT, a LLVM-
based compiler for RISC-V target. COGENT pro-
vides configurable instruction-level tagging support
to several different tag widths and coverage. We
also make changes to the LLD linker to support
COGENT.
• We demonstrate the efficacy of COGENT via a CFI
implementation.
• We evaluate the example CFI implementation
for correctness and backwards compatibility. We
demonstrate moderate to low performance overhead
and binary bloat.
• Through case studies, we demonstrate potential real-
world applicability of COGENT.
Summary of Results: We evaluated the correctness of
COGENT by compiling and running a subset of the SPEC
CPU2017 benchmark suite on Commercial Off The Shelf
(COTS) hardware. Our subset has small function sizes,
heavy memory overhead, and high loop counts, all of which
stress instruction caches. For our example CFI implemen-
tation, we found that COGENT increased the size of the
.text section of these programs by an average of 29.32%
for the lowest tag coverage, and 18.27% for the highest. We
found that backward-compatibility performance (i.e., over-
head imposed by tagged binaries running on tag-unaware
hardware) was impacted by an average of 13.40% for the
low coverage and 5.72% for the highest. We also present
several possible use cases for the system, including specific
recent CVEs that could be addressed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2
provides the technical background necessary to understand
the remainder of the paper. In section 3 and section 4, we
present the overview and technical details of COGENT. We
evaluate COGENT in section 5 and provide case studies to
highlight benefits of using COGENT. Finally, we present
related work in section 6 and conclude in section 7.
2. Background
2.1. Security via Tagging
Tagging is a technique that very broadly associates some
amount of metadata (the tag), with a memory location and
registers. Specially designed architectures then consume that
tag and enforce a security policy. Tags can be associated
with a) memory objects (data tagging) allowing policies to
track and protect data in memory, and/or on b) code (in-
struction tagging), allowing policies to change or extend the
behavior of the tagged instructions. Of particular importance
to this paper is instruction tagging.
Instruction Tagging: allows a tag-aware architecture to ex-
ecute additional code or checks on any instruction associated
with a particular tag. Instruction tags are useful in imple-
menting Control-Flow Integrity (CFI) policies. Identical tags
are used at control flow sources (call/jump sites) and control
flow targets in order to signify legal control flow.
Tags can be placed on load/stores to protect sensitive
data, forbidding access to a memory region if the tag is
incorrect. These kinds of tags often require corresponding
metadata placed with the data they are meant to access. The
tag policies and enforcement are implementation specific
and form the essence of a tag-based defense. The specific
instruction tags are a function of the intended security
policies, and therefore vary greatly between designs [16].
Differences in tag requirements can even result in different
designs which use the same hardware for similar purposes
[17]. This implementation-specific design requirement is
inherent to the nature of tagging. Tags are simply a way
of providing more information to the program at run time,
but the information needed is dependent on the design of
the system itself.
Broadly speaking, there is a trade-off made in the design
of tag systems between how much information it provides
to the hardware, and how much overhead the tags introduce
into the system. This overhead can include power consump-
tion, hardware complexity, performance or any other costs
paid by the design. Depending on how much information
one’s defense needs, tags can be arbitrarily large, or as
small as a single bit. Designers often use techniques such
as encoding the metadata information into the unused upper
bits of a pointer, but this is often insufficient on its own [14],
requiring additional tagging or ISA(instruction set architec-
ture) changes. The choices of where to store metadata, how
much metadata to store, and how to access it are defining
characteristics of tagging systems.
2.2. LLVM Compiler Infrastructure
The LLVM compiler infrastructure [18] is a fully fea-
tured compiler designed with modularity in mind. It is
