HybridTier: an Adaptive and Lightweight
CXL-Memory Tiering System
Kevin Song
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
xinyang.song@utoronto.ca
Jiacheng Yang
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
jiacheng.yang@mail.utoronto.ca
Zixuan Wang
University of California San Diego
San Diego, USA
zxwang@ucsd.edu
Jishen Zhao
University of California San Diego
San Diego, USA
jzhao@ucsd.edu
Sihang Liu
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada
sihangliu@uwaterloo.ca
Gennady Pekhimenko
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
pekhimenko@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Modern workloads are demanding increasingly larger mem-
ory capacity. Compute Express Link (CXL)-based memory
tiering has emerged as a promising solution for addressing
this problem by utilizing traditional DRAM alongside slow-
tier CXL memory devices. We analyze prior tiering systems
and observe two challenges for high-performance memory
tiering: adapting to skewed but dynamically varying data
hotness distributions while minimizing memory and cache
overhead due to tiering.
To address these challenges, we propose HybridTier, an
adaptive and lightweight tiering system for CXL memory.
HybridTier tracks both long-term data access frequency
and short-term access momentum simultaneously to accu-
rately capture and adapt to shifting hotness distributions.
HybridTier reduces the metadata memory overhead by track-
ing data accesses probabilistically, obtaining higher memory
e!ciency by trading o" a small amount of tracking inaccu-
racy that has a negligible impact on application performance.
To reduce cache overhead, HybridTier uses lightweight data
structures that optimize for data locality to track data hotness.
Our evaluations show that HybridTier outperforms prior sys-
tems by up to 91% (19% geomean), incurring 2.0 → 7.8↑ less
memory overhead and 1.7 → 3.5↑ less cache misses.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware ↓ Memory and dense stor-
age; • Software and its engineering ↓ Memory man-
agement.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for pro#t or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the #rst page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci#c
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1080-3/2025/03
h!ps://doi.org/10.1145/3676642.3736119
Keywords: Compute Express Link, Tiered Memory
ACM Reference Format:
Kevin Song, Jiacheng Yang, Zixuan Wang, Jishen Zhao, Sihang
Liu, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2025. HybridTier: an Adaptive and
Lightweight CXL-Memory Tiering System. In Proceedings of the
30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
gramming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3 (ASPLOS ’25),
March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 17 pages. h!ps://doi.org/10.1145/3676642.3736119
1 Introduction
Modern applications [5, 6, 84, 88] demand increasingly large
memory capacity and high bandwidth. To keep up with this
fast growth, one potential solution is to install more and
higher-capacity DRAM modules. However, the amount of
DRAM within a single server is limited due to space con-
straints. In addition, main memory is already one of the most
expensive components in data center servers. Meta reports
that 37% of the total cost of ownership per rack is spent on
memory alone [48]. Purchasing more DRAM modules will
only exacerbate this trend. Moreover, the growth in DRAM
density has been slowing down since the last decade [53, 57],
further limiting the capacity scalability of main memory.
Compute Express Link (CXL) based memory tiering is a
promising solution to this challenge. CXL is an industry-
standard interconnect protocol [60]. Memory (e.g., DDR4/5
DRAM) attached through CXL interface is byte-addressable,
directly accessible by the host CPU, and supports standard
memory allocation interfaces. Compared to local DRAM,
CXL-attached memory has a larger capacity and lower cost-
per-GB, as the CXL bus consumes less power and allows
DRAM modules to be utilized in a more compact form factor.
On the other hand, CXL memory su"ers from higher latency
and lower bandwidth. As shown in Figure 1, compared to
local DRAM, CXL memory devices introduce 50→100 ns of
additional access latency [48], while achieving 20→70% of its
bandwidth [77]. Therefore, a tiering system should prioritize
placing hot data in local DRAM (fast-tier) while keeping cold
data in CXL memory (slow-tier) for better performance.
112
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Ro!erdam, Netherlands Kevin Song et al.
2-5x local
DRAM latency
CPU
Local DRAM
CXL-attached
memory
CXL
20-70% local
DRAM BW
per channel
DDR
Figure 1. Illustration for CXL-attached memory expansion.
Performance numbers obtained from [48, 77].
However, achieving high tiering performance is challeng-
ing. We pro#le large memory workloads and make two ob-
servations. 1) Real-world workloads often exhibit skewed yet
dynamically varying data hotness distributions [5, 23, 88].
For instance, in-memory caches often exhibit Zipf or power-
law access distributions [6, 88], where the majority of ac-
cesses are focused on a small fraction of data. At the same
time, hot data can become cold in a matter of minutes [6, 88],
causing changes in data hotness distribution. 2) Managing
data access statistics can incur signi#cant overhead. Large
memory servers with terabytes of memory contains billions
of pages. Tiering metadata associated with each page com-
bined can decrease the cost-e"ectiveness of tiering. In ad-
dition, frequent access of tiering metadata generates high
amounts of CPU cache tra!c, degrading application perfor-
mance due to resource contentions. Therefore, we argue that
an ideal tiering system should satisfy three requirements: 1)
accurately capture the hot set by placing the hottest data in
fast-tier memory 2) quickly adapt to changes in the hotness
distribution 3) minimize tiering metadata overhead.
However, prior systems do not meet all three require-
ments. One class of work adopts frequency-based tiering
[41, 69, 86] by storing the access counts of each page to build
a hotness histogram. Based on this histogram, the tiering
system places the hottest pages in the fast-tier, satisfying
requirement 1. However, frequency-based systems do not
meet requirements 2 and 3. To maintain histogram freshness,
prior works periodically perform “cooling” by reducing the
page access counter values for all pages. In Section 2.3.2,
we extensively analyze this type of freshness mechanism
and demonstrate how it causes tiering systems to be slow
at adapting to hotness changes, failing requirement 2. Fur-
thermore, to store access counts for billions of pages, prior
frequency-based systems can incur gigabytes of memory
overhead per server, translating to lower cost-e"ectiveness.
At the same time, data structures used by prior works to
organize a large number of access counters lack data locality.
Since access counters need to be frequently updated, tiering
systems can generate a large number of cache misses and
degrade application performance, failing requirement 3.
Another class of prior works [46, 48, 52] is recency-based
tiering, which uses access recency to approximate data hot-
ness. Such systems use metrics such as time between consecu-
tive page faults to make data placement decisions. In general,
recency-based systems meet requirement 3 since recency sta-
tistics are less resource-intensive to manage than frequency
counterparts [27, 29, 41]. Intuitively, recency systems only
need to store the most recent event without the need to
track historical events. However, recency-based systems fail
to satisfy requirement 1. Since such systems only consider
access statics in a short time interval, they are susceptible to
misclassifying cold pages as hot [28, 41, 46]. Recency-based
systems also do not satisfy requirement 2. While recency
metrics are naturally “fresh” and thus do not require cooling,
this alone is not su!cient to achieve high adaptiveness. We
demonstrate in Section 2.3.2 that satisfying requirement 1 is
a prerequisite for requirement 2.
In this work, we propose HybridTier, an application trans-
parent tiering system that addresses the three requirements.
To manage workloads with skewed but dynamically vary-
ing hotness distributions, HybridTier maintains two metrics
for each page to capture both long-term access history and
short-term hotness variations. HybridTier considers statis-
tics from both metrics to enable a $exible migration policy.
For promotion–moving data from the slow-tier to fast-tier–
HybridTier promotes not only pages with high historical
hotness but also pages with high access momentum in the
short-term to quickly identify pages that have recently be-
come hot. For demotion, HybridTier adopts a second-chance
policy to swiftly demote pages that were historically hot but
have recently turned cold.
However, maintaining two metrics for every page can ex-
acerbate the problem of high metadata memory overhead. To
address this challenge, we make the observation that tiering
systems can tolerate a small amount of tracking inaccuracy
without noticeably a"ecting application performance. Based
on this observation, HybridTier tracks memory accesses us-
ing counting bloom #lters (CBF) [21], a probabilistically data
structure that trades higher memory e!ciency for lower
tracking accuracy. HybridTier’s CBF is also cache e!cient,
as it is more compact and requires fewer memory accesses
compared to data structures used by prior works. To further
reduce cache misses, HybridTier optimizes the locality of
CBF by adopting blocked CBF [61, 63].
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We analyze existing tiering systems and reveal three new
#ndings: 1) Adapting to changing hotness is challenging,
causing suboptimal performance under real-world work-
loads 2) Maintaining historical access information can
incur high metadata memory overhead 3) Tiering systems
can su"er from high number of cache misses due to poor
data locality during metadata updates.
• We introduce HybridTier, an application transparent mem-
ory tiering system that is adaptive and lightweight. Hy-
bridTier adopts a novel access tracking method that cap-
tures both long-term hotness distribution and short-term
changes in data hotness. At the same time, HybridTier
113
