Reconfigurable Quantum Instruction Set Computers
for High Performance Attainable on Hardware
Zhaohui Yang
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Hong Kong
zhaohui@ucsb.edu
Dawei Ding
Fudan University
Shanghai Institute for Mathematics
and Interdisciplinary Sciences
Shanghai, China
daweiding@fudan.edu.cn
Qi Ye
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
yeq22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Cupjin Huang
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Bellevue, WA, USA
pertox4726@gmail.com
Jianxin Chen∗
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
chenjianxin@tsinghua.edu.cn
Yuan Xie
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Hong Kong
yuanxie@ust.hk
Abstract
Despite remarkable milestones in quantum computing, the
performance of current quantum hardware remains limited.
One critical path to higher performance is to expand the
quantum ISA with basis gates that have higher fidelity and
greater synthesis capabilities than the standard CNOT. How-
ever, this substantially increases gate calibration overhead
and introduces challenges in compiler optimization. Conse-
quently, although more expressive ISAs (even complex, con-
tinuous gate sets) have been proposed, they still remain pri-
marily proofs-of-concept and have not been widely adopted.
To move beyond these hurdles and unlock the perfor-
mance gains offered by expressive continuous ISAs, we in-
troduce the concept of “reconfigurable quantum instruction
set computers” (ReQISC). It incorporates (1) a unified mi-
croarchitecture capable of directly implementing arbitrary
2Q gates equivalently, i.e., SU(4) modulo 1Q rotations, with
theoretically optimal gate durations given any 2Q coupling
Hamiltonian and (2) a compilation framework tailored to Re-
QISC primitives for end-to-end synthesis and optimization,
comprising a program-aware pass that refines high-level rep-
resentations, a program-agnostic pass for aggressive circuit-
level optimization, and an SU(4)-aware routing pass that
minimizes hardware mapping overhead.
We detail the hardware implementation to demonstrate
the feasibility of this superior gate scheme in terms of both
pulse control and calibration. By leveraging the expressivity
of SU(4) and the time minimality realized by the underlying
microarchitecture, the SU(4)-based ISA achieves remarkable
performance, with a 4.97-fold reduction in average pulse
duration to implement arbitrary 2Q gates, compared to the
usual CNOT/CZ scheme on mainstream flux-tunable trans-
mons. Supported by the end-to-end compiler, ReQISC out-
performs the conventional CNOT-based ISA, state-of-the-art
∗Corresponding author. Email: chenjianxin@tsinghua.edu.cn.
compiler, and pulse implementation counterparts by signifi-
cantly reducing 2Q gate count, circuit depth, pulse duration,
qubit mapping overhead, and program fidelity losses. For the
first time, ReQISC makes the theoretical benefits of continu-
ous ISAs practically feasible.
1 Introduction
Quantum hardware has advanced rapidly over the past two
decades, achieving remarkable milestones including quan-
tum supremacy [3], quantum utility [36], and achieving error
rates below the fault-tolerant threshold [2]. Today’s quantum
processors come with detailed device specifications such as
native gate sets and pulse-level controls, accessible through
a cloud interface or a complete system delivery. However,
hardware noise presents critical challenges for both noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) [54] and fault-tolerant
application-scale quantum (FASQ) [55] devices, significantly
limiting executable program scales and impacting computa-
tional reliability [2, 3, 36].
To pursue a practical quantum advantage, many sophis-
ticated architectural supports have been proposed by ex-
ploring advanced instruction set architectures (ISA) beyond
the conventional CNOT-based paradigm (Figure 1). For spe-
cific applications, novel 2Q quantum gates like Google’s
Sycamore from the fSim family offer higher fidelity and are
harder to simulate classically [3], while gates like SQiSW aim
to improve fidelity and synthesis efficiency [29]. Physical
platforms developed by Google, Rigetti, IonQ, Quantinuum,
and IBM have also demonstrated continuous gate sets [1,
24, 30, 31, 56], which appear to yield improvements in fi-
delity [48, 65]. At the frontier, recent works have proposed
using the entire SU(4) group as the most expressive ISA,
achieving optimal-duration gates on flux-tunable transmons
with 99.37% average fidelity in experiments [11, 14].
Adopting more expressive quantum ISAs offers signifi-
cant theoretical benefits, most notably a reduction in the 2Q
1
arXiv:2511.06746v2
[quant-ph]
14
Feb
2026
Zhaohui Yang et al.
Application/Algorithm
Quantum Chip / Hardware
Quantum-Classical Control Interface
(High-level) Programming Language
Instruction Set Architecture
Compiler Transpiler Runtime
Microarchitecture
Quantum
Error
Correction
(Firmware)
ISA Performance
(Expressivity, Speed, Precision)
Real-World
Practicality
(Compiler
optimization,
Calibration
efficiency)
ReQISC
SQiSW
Rigetti XY(θ)
IBM frac ZZ;
IonQ partial MS
Google fSim
AshN
IBM optimal
XX(θ) synthesis
Mirage
(SQiSW compiler)
TKet/Paulihedral/2QAN/etc.
(App-specific CNOT compiler)
Qiskit/TKet/BQSKit/etc.
(General CNOT compiler)
Quantum Computer System Stack
B gate
Figure 1. Advancing architectural support for practical quan-
tum advantage.
gate count required for circuit synthesis [1, 11, 24, 30, 31].
This is demonstrated by comparing the Haar-random syn-
thesis cost of representative 2Q basis gates against the stan-
dard CNOT-equivalent gates. For instance, the cost is 3 for
CNOT/CZ/iSWAP [57], around 2.21 for SQiSW [29], 2 for B
gate [73], and even lower for combinatorial or continuous
gate sets [53]. However, despite the variety of quantum ISAs
available, none have successfully challenged the dominance
of the CNOT-based ISA due to several inherent challenges:
Hardware implementation and calibration. Imple-
menting diverse 2Q gates with high precision and simple
control via unified gate schemes across diverse quantum plat-
forms remains a significant challenge, especially for complex,
continuous quantum ISAs. For example, although B gate was
proposed decades ago [73], it has only recently been im-
plemented natively [14, 49]; IBM’s fractional ZZ gates are
deployed on their Heron QPUs [30], but they have the same
gate time as CZ and on average 1.5 times the error rate of CZ,
according to public data from IBM Quantum Platform [30].
Furthermore, each 2Q gate must be carefully and periodically
calibrated to ensure high precision. While proposals exist
to mitigate calibration overhead [34], their effectiveness is
not guaranteed. Thus, a program with numerous distinct 2Q
gates presents significant execution challenges in practice.
Compilation strategy. Although the capability to imple-
ment more complex ISAs has been demonstrated, effectively
utilizing them to compile programs into fewer gates with
reduced circuit depth remains largely unaddressed. Neither
gate set transpilation [46, 52, 68] nor numerically optimal
synthesis [33, 39] effectively exploits their synthesis poten-
tial for real-world program compilation. We observe that ISA-
customized strategies are crucial at every compilation stage,
from high-level synthesis to hardware mapping. Otherwise,
a theoretically superior ISA may be inferior in practice [33].
To overcome these challenges and establish the practical
superiority of expressive continuous ISAs, we introduce Re-
QISC (Reconfigurable Quantum Instruction Set Computers).
ReQISC is a full-stack framework that integrates compilation,
ISA design, and pulse control to boost performance across
various quantum hardware platforms. At its core, ReQISC
utilizes the most expressive SU(4) as its ISA (i.e., all 2Q gates)
and makes it the highest-performing with minimal gate time
through our proposed microarchitecture (gate scheme). The
ReQISC microarchitecture can straightforwardly implement
arbitrary 2Q gates up to local equivalence in optimal time,
via simple pulse controls, given any 2Q coupling Hamilton-
ian. Recent experimental progress has affirmed the viability
of specific mechanisms in this direction [14]; our scheme,
however, represents a more generalized approach with ex-
tensive architectural exploration, extending the advantages
to a broader hardware spectrum. Our key contributions are:
❶ We introduce a unified microarchitecture for the native,
time-optimal realization of the full SU(4) group under arbi-
trary coupling Hamiltonians. We validate the pulse-control
simplicity and calibration feasibility on representative hard-
ware platforms. To ensure experimental feasibility across
all 2Q gates, we incorporate a gate mirroring mechanism
that resolves the control singularity of near-identity gates at
compile time without incurring 2Q gate count overhead.
❷ We present the first end-to-end compiler tailored to
SU(4) characteristics. Based on the lower-bound analysis
of required SU(4) resources for synthesizing multi-qubit
circuits, our compiler employs both program-aware and
program-agnostic passes to optimize the overall SU(4) gate
count. We address the program-specific calibration overhead
and also effectively manage the trade-off between calibration
overhead and aggressive 2Q gate count reduction.
❸ We propose the program-aware template-based synthe-
sis method that first pre-synthesizes optimal SU(4)-based
circuit templates for refined intermediate representations
(IR) and then selectively assembles the whole circuit.
❹ We also propose a hierarchical, program-agnostic syn-
thesis pass to aggressively lower the 2Q gate count, build-
ing on circuit partitioning and approximate synthesis. We
introduce the partitioning compactness metric to guide co-
optimization and develop a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
compacting pass based on approximate commutation rules.
❺ Furthermore, we introduce a novel SU(4)-aware routing
pass, dubbed mirroring-SABRE, which significantly reduces
the routing overhead induced by topology constraints.
2 Background
2.1 Quantum instruction set
Similar to its classical counterpart, a quantum ISA serves as
an interface between software and hardware, by mapping
the high-level semantics of quantum programs to low-level
native quantum operations or pulse sequences on hardware.
Quantum instructions involve physical operations on qubits
that alter their states. Typically, these instructions include
qubit initialization, a universal gate set, and measurement.
2
