SpeContext: Enabling Efficient Long-context Reasoning with
Speculative Context Sparsity in LLMs
Jiaming Xu
jiamingxu@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University; SII
Shanghai, China
Jiayi Pan
pan_jiayi@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University;
Infinigence-AI
Shanghai, China
Hanzhen Wang
alex-wang@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Yongkang Zhou
zeenny.willians@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University; SII
Shanghai, China
Jiancai Ye
yejiancai@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Yu Wang
yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Guohao Dai∗
daiguohao@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University;
Infinigence-AI; SII
Shanghai, China
Abstract
As test-time scaling in large language model(LLM) reasoning has
been proven effective in enhancing the model performance through
step-by-step generation, this long-context generation incurs sub-
stantial Key-Value(KV) cache, posing a critical bottleneck for prac-
tical applications deployment(e.g., Agents). While recent KV cache
optimizations perform well in the long-context input scenario, the
following problems remain unsolved if directly applied to long-
context reasoning. (1) Time-consuming layer-wise retrieval
operation. The retrieval operation, which selects the important
KV pairs in each layer, brings the synchronization overhead that
scales with model depth due to the data dependency, resulting
in up to 60% latency overhead. (2) Complete retention of the
newly generated KV cache. Existing works designed for long-
context input choose to retain the KV pair of newly generated
tokens to avoid repeated, time-consuming processing on the KV
cache, rendering them ineffective in long-context reasoning. (3)
Performance degradation with a tiny increase in sequence
length. Existing offloading strategies determined before inference
cannot adapt to the increasing sequence length, resulting in > 80%
performance degradation with a tiny increase in sequence length.
In this paper, we point out that the objective of the retrieval
algorithms is to align with the LLM, which is similar to the objec-
tive of knowledge distillation in LLMs. We analyze the similarity
∗Corresponding Author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
in information focus between the distilled language model(DLM)
and the original LLM from the perspective of information theory,
and thus propose a novel paradigm that leverages a DLM as
the retrieval algorithm. Based on the insight, we present SpeCon-
text, an algorithm and system co-design for long-context reasoning.
(1) At the algorithm level, SpeContext proposes lightweight
retrieval head based on the head-level attention weights of DLM,
achieving > 90% parameters reduction by pruning the redundancy.
(2) At the system level, SpeContext designs an asynchronous
prefetch dataflow via the elastic loading strategy, effectively
overlapping KV cache retrieval with the LLM computation. (3)
At the compilation level, SpeContext constructs the theoretical
memory model and implements an adaptive memory manage-
ment system to achieve acceleration by maximizing GPU memory
utilization. We deploy and evaluate SpeContext in two resource-
constrained environments, cloud and edge. Extensive experiments
show that, compared with the Huggingface framework, SpeCon-
text achieves up to 24.89× throughput improvement in cloud and
10.06× speedup in edge with negligible accuracy loss, pushing the
Pareto frontier of accuracy and throughput.
ACM Reference Format:
Jiaming Xu, Jiayi Pan, Hanzhen Wang, Yongkang Zhou, Jiancai Ye, Yu
Wang, and Guohao Dai. 2025. SpeContext: Enabling Efficient Long-context
Reasoning with Speculative Context Sparsity in LLMs. In . ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
Generative large language models(LLMs) mark a significant ad-
vancement in the pursuit of Artificial General Intelligence(AGI).
Their successful application across various domains has greatly
contributed to the rapid advancement of numerous downstream
tasks (e.g., pharmaceutical [29], finance [19], and ecology [27]), and
their remarkable capabilities have attracted widespread attention,
1
arXiv:2512.00722v1
[cs.AI]
30
Nov
2025
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jiaming Xu, Jiayi Pan, Hanzhen Wang, Yongkang Zhou, Jiancai Ye, Yu Wang, and Guohao Dai
Huggingface FlashAttention Quest FlashInfer
ClusterKV ShadowKV Ours
0.6
0.8
1
0 2 4 6 8
0.8
0.9
1
0 2 4 6
Normalized
Accuracy
Normalized Throughput
(a) Long-context Input (b) Long-context Reasoning
Better
QKV
Gen.
Full Attention Sparse Attention
Prompt New Token
Select
Full KV Cache
Excluded Token
Attention FFN
QKV
Gen.
Attention FFN
Prefill
Autoregressive decode
4 Request
16K Length +
Model > 24GB
(RTX 4090)
Selected KV Cache
Better
Budget =
1024, 2048 Budget =
1024, 2048
Figure 1: (a)(b) Pareto frontiers on KV cache selection in long-
context input and reasoning scenarios.
spurring the development of a new wave of LLM-based software ap-
plications (e.g., AI agents [14]). As the scaling law gradually slows
down, the test-time scaling [28] in LLM reasoning is emerging
as a powerful tool in enhancing the model capabilities, especially
in solving complex problems(e.g., mission planning [10, 14, 44]
and mathematical derivation [1]), through step-by-step chain-of-
thought generation [15]. Moreover, some latest works point out
that as the length of the chain-of-thought reasoning increases, the
LLM capabilities, especially the mission planning(e.g., 8𝐾 reasoning
length) and information search(5𝑀 search length) in AI agents [44],
can be significantly improved.
To effectively support long-context reasoning, LLM providers
have enhanced the long-context processing capabilities of their
LLMs during pretraining, with context windows of over 100K to-
kens becoming a common standard (e.g., Kimi K2 with 128K [35] and
OpenAI o3 with 200K [11]). Despite these algorithm advances, the
computational and memory burden associated with Key-Value(KV)
cache still prevents the efficient practical deployment. KV cache is
a fundamental component in the LLM, which effectively reduces
the computation by reusing past key-value pairs, but introduces
significant memory overhead, which is proportional to the context
length. Furthermore, during the autoregressive decoding, the gen-
eration of each new token requires reading the entire KV cache
to compute attention weights, leading to severe latency overhead.
For example, in the case of Llama3.1-8B [13] on a NVIDIA RTX
4090 GPU, generating a single token with a 16K context takes twice
as long as generating a token with a 1k context, and theoretically
generates 2GB of memory footprint for KV cache, which means
that for an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU, only 3 requests can be pro-
cessed in parallel at most shown in Figure 1. For the LLM cloud
service vendors, the longer response and limited throughput will
translate to higher infrastructure costs (e.g., energy and hardware
consumption) and suboptimal user experiences [16].
Consequently, many previous works have explored various tech-
niques for KV cache optimization, particularly in resource-constrained
environments by reducing the KV cache involved during infer-
ence, encompassing algorithm optimization (e.g., permanent evic-
tion [6, 39] and dynamic selection [24, 32, 33] of KV cache), system
enhancement (e.g., customized CUDA kernel design [24, 32, 33]).
These algorithms establish a paradigm centered on layer-wise re-
trieval operation during the decoding phase shown in Figure 2(a).
LLM inference can be divided into two phases, the prefill and de-
coding phase detailed in Section 2. Most previous works [24, 32, 33]
preprocess KV cache upon completion of the prefill phase, and the
corresponding retrieval algorithms retrieve a subset of preprocessed
KV cache for each generation during decoding phase.
However, the core trade-off of this paradigm is its departure
from mathematical equivalence. By selectively computing attention
over a fraction of the context, these methods inherently introduce
computational shortcuts that can lead to a degradation in model
accuracy. Therefore, as illustrated in Figure 1(a)(b), two Pareto fron-
tiers in long-context input and reasoning scenarios are established,
forcing a compromise between inference speed and model accuracy.
Despite this paradigm performing well in the long-context input
scenario, it still suffers from the following critical limitations during
the decoding phase if directly applied in the long-context reasoning
scenario.
Challenge-1: Time-consuming layer-wise retrieval oper-
ation. Figure 2(a) shows that the algorithm paradigm needs to
perform the retrieval over the KV cache and load the corresponding
KV pairs based on the retrieval result before attention computation
in each layer, resulting in the sequential dataflow due to data de-
pendency. This serialization introduces substantial synchronization
overhead, breaking the natural overlap between computation and
memory access in the original pipeline. Furthermore, the retrieval
operation is repeated in each layer during decoding, and thus the
overhead scales linearly with model depth and quickly becomes
bottleneck(up to 60% latency) shown in Figure 2(a).
Challenge-2: Complete retention of the newly generated
KV cache. Existing works designed for the long-context input sce-
nario preprocess the KV cache by complex and time-consuming
algorithms(e.g., clustering [24] and quantization [32]) during the
prefill phase(i.e., the KV cache of the prompt), and only retrieve
the preprocessed KV cache and completely retain the newly gen-
erated KV pair during the decoding phase to avoid the repeated
preprocessing shown in Figure 2(a). With the substantial retrieval
overhead in each layer, performance thus degrades greatly in the
long-context reasoning scenario, even worse than full attention(i.e.,
FlashInfer [43]), as shown in Figure 1(b).
Challenge-3: Performance degradation with a tiny increase
in sequence length. In resource-constrained environments(e.g.,
low-end GPU with limited memory in edge and high-end GPU
with multi-requests in cloud), KV cache tends to be offloaded to
the lower-tier memory (e.g., from GPU HBM to CPU DRAM). How-
ever, existing systems determine the offloading strategy that either
fully offloading or never offloading (e.g., ClusterKV [24]) before
inference. Due to the inference dynamics in LLM reasoning, the
predetermined strategy cannot adapt to the increasing sequence
length during the autoregressive decoding, resulting in > 80% per-
formance degradation with a tiny increase in sequence length.
2
