DeepContext: A Context-aware, Cross-platform, and
Cross-framework Tool for Performance Profiling and
Analysis of Deep Learning Workloads
Qidong Zhao∗
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, United State
qzhao24@ncsu.edu
Hao Wu∗
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, United State
hwu27@gmu.edu
Yueming Hao
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, United State
yhao24@ncsu.edu
Zilingfeng Ye
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, United State
yipzlf@gmail.com
Jiajia Li
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, United State
jiajia.li@ncsu.edu
Xu Liu
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, United State
xliu88@ncsu.edu
Keren Zhou
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, United State
kzhou6@gmu.edu
Abstract
Effective performance profiling and analysis are essential for
optimizing training and inference of deep learning models,
especially given the growing complexity of heterogeneous
computing environments. However, existing tools often lack
the capability to provide comprehensive program context
information and performance optimization insights for so-
phisticated interactions between CPUs and GPUs. This paper
introduces DeepContext, a novel profiler that links pro-
gram contexts across high-level Python code, deep learning
frameworks, underlying libraries written in C/C++, as well as
device code executed on GPUs. DeepContext incorporates
measurements of both coarse- and fine-grained performance
metrics for major deep learning frameworks, such as PyTorch
and JAX, and is compatible with GPUs from both Nvidia
and AMD, as well as various CPU architectures, including
x86 and ARM. In addition, DeepContext integrates a novel
GUI that allows users to quickly identify hotpots and an
innovative automated performance analyzer that suggests
users with potential optimizations based on performance
metrics and program context. Through detailed use cases,
we demonstrate how DeepContext can help users identify
and analyze performance issues to enable quick and effective
optimization of deep learning workloads. We believe Deep
Context is a valuable tool for users seeking to optimize
complex deep learning workflows across multiple compute
environments.
1 Introduction
The rapid advancement of deep learning has led to increas-
ingly complex models [3, 17, 40] deployed across diverse and
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
heterogeneous computing environments. Optimizing the
training and inference of these models is critical for improv-
ing performance and reducing computational costs [25, 29].
However, the sophisticated interactions between CPUs and
GPUs, coupled with the diversity of frameworks [9, 39] and
compilation modes [5], pose significant challenges for devel-
opers seeking to identify and address performance bottle-
necks effectively.
To improve the efficiency of deep learning workloads by
fully utilizing hardware resources, effective performance
profiling tools are essential. These tools include framework-
specific solutions, such as the PyTorch profiler [41] and the
JAX profiler [28], as well as those provided by hardware ven-
dors, like Nsight Systems [37], Roctracer [4], and VTune [27].
The primary functionality of these tools is tracing, which
captures metrics associated with individual CPU and GPU
operations and displays them on a comprehensive timeline
to assist users in investigating performance bottlenecks.
The design of existing tools presents several challenges
that hinder thorough performance analysis and optimization.
We have summarized their features and limitations in Table 1.
First, they often fail to provide a comprehensive view of
performance metrics across the entire software stack, which
spans from high-level Python code and frameworks down
to low-level C++ operations and GPU instructions. At best,
Nsight Systems can correlate Python with C++ code, but it
cannot provide information about deep learning operators
and GPU instructions. Figure 1 illustrates this limitation. In
Figure 1a, only C++ code is visible in the call path, and it is
unclear where the convolution function was called without
framework information. This is because the backward and
forward operators are launched from different CPU threads
1
arXiv:2411.02797v1
[cs.PF]
5
Nov
2024
Table 1. Comparison of DeepContext (our tool) with existing profiling tools.
Profiling
Tools
Python
Context
Framework
Context
C++
Context
Device
Context
Cross
GPUs
Cross
Frameworks
CPU
Profiling
Nsight Systems [37] ✓ × ✓ × × ✓ ✓
RocTracer [4] × × × × × × ×
JAX profiler [28] ✓ × × × ✓ × ✓
PyTorch profiler [41] ✓ ✓ × × ✓ × ✓
DeepContext ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
(a) The hot call path w/o framework context
(b) The hot call path w/ framework context
Figure 1. Comparison of highlighted call paths w/ and w/o
framework context. The thicker the color of a frame, the
more time has been spent on that frame.
in PyTorch. Such a limitation obscures the pinpointing of
performance problems related to specific convolution oper-
ations, especially when a complex model may invoke hun-
dreds of convolution operations [24]. In contrast, Figure 1b
reveals the Python call path and associated deep learning
operators, providing deeper insights for performance opti-
mization.
Second, most existing performance tools trace and record
every operation, causing huge profiles when profiling long-
running training workloads. Identifying issues within traces
that contain millions of operations often requires a great deal
of manual efforts. Moreover, the voluminous profile data can
consume significant memory resources, potentially exhaust-
ing DRAM capacity or making it impossible for visualization.
Existing tools can only aggregate metrics (e.g., time) post-
mortem for individual kernels, but they fail to streamline
metrics aggregation online to reduce profile size and do not
differentiate between instances called from different contexts
for automated problem identification.
Lastly, existing tools lack portability across platforms and
frameworks. Vendor-provided tools, such as Nvidia’s Nsight
suite, can profile events from JAX and PyTorch on Nvidia
GPUs, but they are incompatible with workloads running
on AMD GPUs. On the other hand, framework-specific tools
like the PyTorch profiler can support both AMD and Nvidia
GPUs but cannot handle workloads written in JAX. This frag-
mentation in tool availability increases the learning curve
for users and limits their ability to cross-reference findings
across different frameworks and GPUs, making it difficult to
determine which setup best suits their workloads.
In response to these challenges, we introduce Deep
Context, a novel profiler that delivers comprehensive per-
formance insights for deep learning workloads. Unlike ex-
isting profilers that lack essential context, DeepContext
captures all critical program context information relevant
to deep learning workloads. As shown in Table 1, Deep
Context enables the identification of performance issues
in multiple layers of the software stack, spanning high-level
Python code, deep learning frameworks, underlying libraries
written in C/C++, and device code executed on GPUs. Addi-
tionally, DeepContext supports performance profiling for
major deep learning frameworks including PyTorch and JAX,
AMD and Nvidia GPUs, as well as x86 and ARM CPUs. Fi-
nally, DeepContext enables the collection, attribution, and
aggregation of both coarse and fine-grained performance
metrics, allowing for detailed investigation of performance
bottlenecks with minimal profile data, even for long-running
applications.
This paper presents the design, implementation, and eval-
uation of DeepContext and makes the following research
contributions:
2
