DejaVuzz: Disclosing Transient Execution Bugs with
Dynamic Swappable Memory and Differential
Information Flow Tracking assisted Processor Fuzzing
Jinyan Xu
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
phantom@zju.edu.cn
Yangye Zhou
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
zhouyangye@zju.edu.cn
Xingzhi Zhang
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
xingzhizhang@zju.edu.cn
Yinshuai Li
Southern University of Science and
Technology
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
liys2022@mail.sustech.edu.cn
Qinhan Tan
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA
qinhant@princeton.edu
Yinqian Zhang
Southern University of Science and
Technology
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
yinqianz@acm.org
Yajin Zhou
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
yajin_zhou@zju.edu.cn
Rui Chang
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
crix1021@zju.edu.cn
Wenbo Shen
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
shenwenbo@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Transient execution vulnerabilities have emerged as a critical
threat to modern processors. Hardware fuzzing testing tech-
niques have recently shown promising results in discovering
transient execution bugs in large-scale out-of-order proces-
sor designs. However, their poor microarchitectural control-
lability and observability prevent them from effectively and
efficiently detecting transient execution vulnerabilities.
This paper proposes DejaVuzz, a novel pre-silicon stage
processor transient execution bug fuzzer. DejaVuzz utilizes
two innovative operating primitives: dynamic swappable
memory and differential information flow tracking, enabling
more effective and efficient transient execution vulnerabil-
ity detection. The dynamic swappable memory enables the
isolation of different instruction streams within the same
address space. Leveraging this capability, DejaVuzz gener-
ates targeted training for arbitrary transient windows and
eliminates ineffective training, enabling efficient triggering
of diverse transient windows. The differential information
flow tracking aids in observing the propagation of sensitive
data across the microarchitecture. Based on taints, DejaVuzz
designs the taint coverage matrix to guide mutation and
uses taint liveness annotations to identify exploitable leak-
ages. Our evaluation shows that DejaVuzz outperforms the
state-of-the-art fuzzer SpecDoctor, triggering more com-
prehensive transient windows with lower training overhead
and achieving a 4.7× coverage improvement. And DejaVuzz
also mitigates control flow over-tainting with acceptable
overhead and identifies 5 previously undiscovered transient
execution vulnerabilities (with 6 CVEs assigned) on BOOM
and XiangShan.
1 Introduction
The recent discovery of transient execution vulnerabilities
has unveiled a significant threat to modern processors. These
vulnerabilities, such as Spectre [21] and Meltdown [25], ex-
ploit speculative execution, a key performance optimization
feature, to leak sensitive data through side channels. The
ongoing battle between attackers and defenders resembles
a continuous cat-and-mouse game. For example, Spectre-
V2 [21] promoted the privilege-isolated branch prediction
deployment, but follow-up research soon discovered bugs [3,
44, 50] in other speculation components. Similarly, after Fore-
shadow [45] was patched, Microarchitectural Data Sampling
(MDS) [4, 46] attacks emerged. This arms race not only chal-
lenges the efficacy of existing defense mechanisms but also
underscores the necessity of a proactive approach to auto-
mated transient execution bug detection.
Some efforts [27, 28, 51] have been applied to commodity
processors. However, due to the black-box nature of off-the-
shelf processors, these approaches rely heavily on template-
based generation and fixed side channels, which makes it
difficult for them to uncover new vulnerabilities. On the
contrary, detection approaches at the pre-silicon stage have
yet to be extensively studied. Detecting these vulnerabilities
during the Register Transfer Level (RTL) development phase
is crucial, as hardware bugs are usually difficult to fix once
the design is manufactured. Early detection allows for timely
remediation, preventing these bugs from being integrated
into production hardware. Therefore, proactive testing and
verification at the pre-silicon stage is imperative for ensuring
processor microarchitecture security.
1
arXiv:2504.20934v1
[cs.AR]
29
Apr
2025
Formal verification and fuzzing are commonly used meth-
ods for existing processor RTL transient execution bug detec-
tion. Although formal approaches can prove security prop-
erties exhaustively, limited by the state explosion problem,
existing methods [9, 39, 43, 55] solve the scalability prob-
lem by modeling processor transient execution behavior at
a higher level of abstraction. However, given the complex-
ity of the out-of-order processor design, the microarchitec-
ture implementation details ignored by the model are highly
error-prone [18, 53]. Furthermore, the complicated design
pre-knowledge and heavy manual efforts required for hard-
ware modeling and security property definition also impede
applying formal methods to complex designs.
Recently, processor fuzzing has demonstrated promising
results in verifying large-scale complex processor designs [5,
19, 20, 36, 53], and researchers also have begun applying
fuzzing to detect transient execution vulnerabilities [11, 12,
18]. IntroSpectre [12] and TEESec [11] use gadget tem-
plates to generate Meltdown-type transient execution vulner-
abilities and identify leakage by searching for secret values
in the microarchitecture logs. SpecDoctor [18], on the other
hand, employs a multi-phase random instruction generation
process and utilizes differential testing to detect sensitive
data leakage. However, due to the complexity of the transient
execution vulnerabilities, current fuzzing methods are either
too limited [11, 12], only capable of identifying specific leak-
age patterns, or too inefficient [18], taking days to complete
the detection, thereby limiting their practical adoption. To
effectively and efficiently fuzz transient execution bugs, the
following two challenges need to be addressed.
First, only transiently executed instructions are considered
effective fuzzing payloads, so the fuzzer needs to efficiently
trigger diverse transient windows for fuzzing. However, trig-
gering these transient windows requires deliberate microar-
chitecture training. Due to significant differences in training
patterns among various microarchitecture components, ex-
isting approaches generate limited transient windows with
high training overhead (§6.2). The inability to generate vari-
ous transient windows means the microarchitecture cannot
be fully explored. Additionally, ineffective training instruc-
tions waste simulation time, increasing training overhead
and reducing the fuzzing throughput.
Second, the fuzzer needs to perceive the propagation of
sensitive data during transient execution to guide mutation
and detect leakages. Information flow tracking is a promising
solution, but it suffers from the control flow over-tainting
problem in complex designs [37]. Due to the lack of effective
methods to trace sensitive data, existing fuzzers cannot mea-
sure coverage or identify exploitable leakages (§6.3). Lacking
coverage metrics means that the quality of stimuli cannot
be assessed, leading to inefficient input mutation. Passing
unexploitable leakages to subsequent stages not only results
in false positives but also makes later phases futile, further
misguiding the fuzzing process.
To address the challenges mentioned, we propose De-
jaVuzz, an effective and efficient pre-silicon processor fuzzer
for transient execution vulnerabilities, powered by two novel
operating primitives: dynamic swappable memory and dif-
ferential information flow tracking. Dynamic swappable
memory serves as an isolation primitive, responsible for
transparently switching instruction sequences to control the
microarchitecture to trigger desired transient execution be-
haviors. This primitive resolves conflicts between instruction
sequences by time-sharing the address space. To increase
the diversity of triggered transient windows, DejaVuzz iso-
lates training and transient instruction sequences to generate
arbitrary transient windows, and uses the training deriva-
tion strategy to derive targeted training based on transient
execution information. To reduce the training overhead, De-
jaVuzz isolates each training instruction sequence to explore
different training effects, and eliminates ineffective training
through the training reduction strategy. Differential informa-
tion flow tracking acts as the tracing primitive that is respon-
sible for observing microarchitecture state changes caused
by sensitive data. This primitive eliminates the control flow
over-tainting problem by comparing whether different se-
crets can produce different selections on the same control
signal. With the help of taints, DejaVuzz designs a taint cover-
age matrix to evaluate how sensitive data propagates during
the transient execution, effectively guiding exploration. Fur-
thermore, DejaVuzz introduces taint liveness annotations
to bind state registers to related taint registers. By using
annotated state registers as liveness signals, DejaVuzz filters
out unexploitable taints to reduce false positives.
Overall, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We summarize the challenges of transient execution bug
fuzzing in terms of microarchitectural controllability and
microarchitectural observability and propose two novel
operating primitives: a dynamic swappable memory model
to resolve address space conflicts for better microarchitec-
tural control, and a differential information flow tracking
technique to mitigate control flow over-tainting for im-
proved microarchitectural observation.
• Utilizing these two operating primitives, we develop a new
processor fuzzing framework named DejaVuzz, which ef-
fectively and efficiently detects transient execution bugs.
DejaVuzz designs training derivation and training reduc-
tion strategies atop dynamically swappable memory to
efficiently trigger diverse transient windows, and utilizes
taints generated by differential information flow tracking
to guide fuzzing and identify leakage.
• We evaluate DejaVuzz on two well-known RISC-V out-of-
order processors [54, 57]. Compared to the SOTA fuzzer
SpecDoctor [18], DejaVuzz achieves a 4.7× improvement
in coverage with more comprehensive transient windows
and lower training overhead. DejaVuzz mitigates control
flow over-tainting with acceptable overhead and identifies
2
