CLM: Removing the GPU Memory Barrier for 3D
Gaussian Splatting
Hexu Zhao∗
New York University
New York, NY, USA
hz3496@nyu.edu
Xiwen Min∗
New York University
New York, NY, USA
xm2336@nyu.edu
Xiaoteng Liu
New York University
New York, NY, USA
xiaoteng.liu@nyu.edu
Moonjun Gong
New York University
New York, NY, USA
gw2396@nyu.edu
Yiming Li
New York University
New York, NY, USA
yl7516@nyu.edu
Ang Li
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA, USA
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
ang.li@pnnl.gov
Saining Xie
New York University
New York, NY, USA
sx352@nyu.edu
Jinyang Li
New York University
New York, NY, USA
jinyang@cs.nyu.edu
Aurojit Panda
New York University
New York, NY, USA
apanda@cs.nyu.edu
Abstract
3DGaussianSplatting(3DGS)isanincreasinglypopularnovel
view synthesis approach due to its fast rendering time, and
high-quality output. However, scaling 3DGS to large (or in-
tricate) scenes is challenging due to its substantial memory
requirement, which exceeds the memory capacity of most
GPUs. In this paper, we describe CLM, a system that allows
3DGS to render large scenes using a single consumer-grade
GPU, e.g., RTX4090. It does so by offloading Gaussians to CPU
memory, and loading them into GPU memory only when
necessary. To improve performance and reduce communica-
tion overheads, CLM uses a novel offloading strategy based
on insights into 3DGS’s memory access patterns. This strat-
egy enables efficient pipelining, which overlaps GPU-to-CPU
communication, GPU computation and CPU computation.
Furthermore, CLM exploits these access patterns to reduce
communication volume. Our evaluation shows that the re-
sulting implementation can render a large scene that requires
102 million Gaussians on a single RTX4090 and achieve state-
of-the-art reconstruction quality. The code is open-sourced
at: https://github.com/nyu-systems/CLM-GS
∗Hexu and Xiwen contributed equally.
ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0International
License.
ASPLOS ’26, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2359-9/2026/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790140
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Het-
erogeneous (hybrid) systems; • Computing methodolo-
gies → Graphics systems and interfaces.
Keywords: GPU memory offloading; Heterogeneous systems
for ML; 3D Gaussian Splatting
ACM Reference Format:
Hexu Zhao, Xiwen Min, Xiaoteng Liu, Moonjun Gong, Yiming Li,
Ang Li, Saining Xie, Jinyang Li, and Aurojit Panda. 2026. CLM: Re-
moving the GPU Memory Barrier for 3D Gaussian Splatting. In
Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume
2 (ASPLOS ’26), March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3779212.3790140
1 Introduction
Recently, there has been significant interest [3, 5, 8, 23, 40, 51]
in using 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for novel view synthe-
sis (Figure 1). Given a set of posed images (i.e., images with
position and orientation) for a 3D scene, 3DGS iteratively
trains a scene representation that consists of a large number of
anisotropic 3D Gaussians that capture the scene’s appearance
and geometry. Users can then use the trained scene repre-
sentation to render images from a previously unseen view.
Compared to other novel view synthesis approaches, 3DGS
has faster rendering time while achieving comparable image
quality, thus leading to its surging popularity.
The quality of images rendered using 3DGS depends on
the fidelity of the trained scene representation. Scenes that
capturealargeareaorcontainintricatedetailsrequirealarger
number of Gaussians. As a result, 3DGS’s memory footprint
grows as scene size, scene intricacy, or output image resolu-
tion increases. State-of-the-art 3DGS implementations run
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Hexu Zhao et al.
on GPUs, where memory is not plentiful. Therefore, memory
capacity has been a barrier when scaling 3DGS and apply-
ing it to large intricate scenes with high image resolution.
As we explain in §7, prior work on scaling 3DGS either adds
significant cost because they use multiple GPUs [9, 30, 51],
or compromises rendering quality because they reduce the
scene representation’s fidelity [14, 15, 24, 32, 35, 40, 50].
In this paper, we describe CLM, a system that scales 3DGS
without requiring multiple GPUs or hurting rendered image
quality. CLM’s design is based on the insight that the compu-
tation of 3DGS is inherently sparse; i.e. each training iteration
only accesses a small subset of the scene’s Gaussians. Thus, it
is sufficient to load only this subset into GPU memory, while
leaving the remaining Gaussians offloaded to the more plen-
tiful CPU memory. Despite this straightforward insight, as
the GPU-CPU communication incurs significant overhead, it
is challenging to realize the idea of memory offloading with
good performance.
We develop a novel 3DGS-specific offloading strategy for
CLM. Our offloading strategy minimizes performance over-
heads and scales to large scenes by leveraging four observa-
tions (§3) about the 3DGS training pipeline:
(i) The set of Gaussians accessed by each view (aka a train-
ing image) can be computed ahead-of-time, thereby al-
lowing the loading of Gaussians for one iteration to be
overlapped with the computation for the previous iter-
ation to reduce communication overhead (§4.1, §4.2).
(ii) There is substantial overlap between the Gaussians ac-
cessed by different views, which allows us to cache the
overlapping Gaussians to reduce the communication
volume during each training iteration (§4.2.1).
(iii) The training process exhibits spatial locality, i.e., views
in the same region tend to access the same Gaussians,
allowing us to schedule training iterations carefully to
maximize overlapped accesses across successive itera-
tions in order to minimize overall communication vol-
ume (§4.2.3).
(iv) We can further use spatial locality to overlap gradient
computation and a substantial portion of the Gaussian
parameter update (§4.2.2).
By exploiting the inherent sparsity in scenes and the four
observations above, CLM can scale to very large scenes: our
evaluation (§6) shows that we can train a large scene with 100
million Gaussians on an a consumer-grade GPU (RTX4090)
while achieving output quality on par with (or better than) the
state-of-the-art systems. Furthermore, we show that CLM’s
3DGS-specificoffloadingsolutionincursmodestperformance
overheads compared to a baseline without offloading when
rendering small scenes that can fit in the baseline system’s
GPU memory.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in §2 we pro-
vide background on novel-view synthesis and 3DGS; in §3 we
detail observations about 3DGS’s memory access patterns; in
§4 we describe CLM’s design and in §5 provide details about
Training Image Novel View
?
Figure 1. The novel view synthesis problem: given a set of training
images (with known pose) from a scene, render the image from a novel
view with an unrecorded camera position and orientation.
A Subset of
Gaussians
Posed Image
Loss
Cull
Rendered
Image
Ground Truth
Rasterize
Back Prop
Back Prop
All
Gaussians
Figure 2. 3D Gaussian Splatting Illustration.
our implementation; we evaluate CLM in §6; and present
related work in §7.
2 Background and Motivation
This section gives an overview of the 3DGS algorithm and its
application, discusses its memory bottleneck, and explains
the challenges associated with naive offloading strategies.
2.1 Novel View Synthesis and 3D Gaussian Splatting
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is the task of rendering an image
of a 3D scene from a previously unseen viewpoint. To do so,
NVS algorithms take as input a set of posed images (Figure 1),
and use this input to construct a scene representation, i.e., a
3D model that captures the scene’s appearance and geometry.
The scene representation is then used to render the desired
image. Modern ML-based NVS approaches all aim to learn
how to reconstruct the scene from input data but differ in how
the scene is represented: 3DGS uses 3D Gaussians [23] while
others have used a mesh [34] or a neural network [36].
3D Position
Covariance
(Scale+Rotation)
Spherical Harmonics
(Color)
Opacity Total
#Param 3 3+4 48 1 59
Table 1. A 3D Gaussian has 59 learnable parameters representing 4
types of attributes.
3DGS represents the scene as a (potentially very large) col-
lection of anisotropic 3D Gaussians, each of which consists
of several dozen parameters representing four types of at-
tributes including position, anisotropic covariance, spherical
harmonic coefficients and opacity, as seen in Table 1. These
