IEEE JOURNAL OF L
A
TEX CLASS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, FEBRUARY 2024 1
STRAW: A Stress-Aware WL-Based Read Reclaim Technique
for High-Density NAND Flash-Based SSDs
Myoungjun Chun, Jaeyong Lee, Inhyuk Choi, Jisung Park, Myungsuk Kim, and Jihong Kim
Abstract—Although read disturbance has emerged as a major
reliability concern, managing read disturbance in modern NAND
flash memory has not been thoroughly investigated yet. From
a device characterization study using real modern NAND flash
memory, we observe that reading a page incurs heterogeneous
reliability impacts on each WL, which makes the existing block-
level read reclaim extremely inefficient. We propose a new WL-
level read-reclaim technique, called STRAW, which keeps track
of the accumulated read-disturbance effect on each WL and
reclaims only heavily-disturbed WLs. By avoiding unnecessary
read-reclaim operations, STRAW reduces read-reclaim-induced
page writes by 83.6% with negligible storage overhead.
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory has successfully achieved continuous
improvements in storage density over decades, but it has come
with significant reliability degradation. Vertical wordline (WL)
stacking and aggressive multi-level cell (MLC) technologies
have effectively increased the bit density of flash chips by
2.4× every two years [1]. However, such capacity-oriented
design decisions make modern flash memory significantly
more susceptible to various error sources, such as retention
loss, read disturbance, and program interference.
In particular, read disturbance has recently gained increasing
attention as a major reliability concern in modern (and future)
high-density flash memory. To read a page (from a target
wordline (WL)), a flash chip applies a high pass-through
voltage Vpass (e.g., > 6 V) to all non-target WLs in the same
block, which unintentionally programs all non-target WLs
slightly and thus can potentially corrupt their stored data when
repeated. As the block size rapidly increases with continuous
vertical WL stacking (e.g., a 123-MB block [2]), reading a
page disturbs a larger amount of data in the same block.
Despite its importance, how to efficiently manage read
disturbance in modern SSDs has yet to be thoroughly investi-
gated; to our knowledge, all prior works on read disturbance
in the literature are based on a simple SSD-management task,
called read reclaim (RR) [3], [4]. When a block’s read count
RC (i.e., the number of page reads to the block) exceeds
a predefined threshold RCMAX, the SSD controller triggers
RR to eliminate read-disturbance-induced errors by rewriting
(copying) all valid pages in the block to other free pages.
The additional writes from RR can significantly affect the
performance and lifetime of SSDs [5], so it is necessary to
carefully set RCMAX for preventing not only read-distrubance-
induced data corruption but also unnecessary RR invocations.
In this work, we show that a conventional RR approach
causes prohibitive performance overhead to guarantee data
Manuscript received August 24, 2024; accepted November 24, 2024. This
work was supported by Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd (IO201207-07809-01)
and IITP (Institute for Information & Communication Technology Planning
& Evaluation) (RS-2024-00347394). (Co-corresponding authors: Myungsuk
Kim and Jihong Kim)
reliability in recent high-density 3D flash memory. In high-
density 3D flash memory, reading a page incurs significantly
higher disturbance to the target WL’s exact neighbors com-
pared to the other WLs in the same block [6], [7]. Such an
asymmetry in read disturbance across WLs makes the existing
block-level RR extremely inefficient. For example, when pages
at the k-th WL WLk are read repeatedly, pages at WLk−1 and
WLk+1 may lose their data at a much lower RC value over
when pages are randomly accessed over entire WL’s. Although
the worst-case access pattern (i.e., repeated reads for the same
WL) may not be likely in practice, the existing RR approach
should handle such a case safely, thus RCMAX being set based
on the worst-case pattern.
To mitigate RR overhead, we propose STRAW (STRess-
Aware WL-based read reclaim technique for high-density
NAND flash-based SSDs), a new WL-level RR technique for
modern SSDs which effectively minimizes unnecessary RR
at low cost. The key insight behind STRAW is that read
disturbance should be managed at a finer granularity, i.e.,
per WL, not per block. Since the impact of read disturbance
is substantially different depending on the location of a
WL, we need a new approach that can selectively reclaim
heavily-disturbed WLs only. To this end, we construct a read-
disturbance model that can accurately estimate the impact of a
page read on the reliability of each non-target WL in the same
block, which enables STRAW to identify any heavily-disturbed
WLs and reclaim them in a timely manner. For an efficient
implementation of STRAW, we leverage the Space-Saving
algorithm [8] to mitigate the space overhead for tracking
the actual read-disturbance effect to WLs in each block. Our
evaluation using the state-of-the-art SSD simulator [9] shows
that STRAW reduces RR-induced writes by 83.6% compared
to existing RR approaches with negligible space overhead.
II. READ DISTURBANCE IN MODERN SSDS
Read-Disturbance Variations in Modern Flash Memory.
Unlike in planar (2D) flash memory, where a page read
disturbs all non-target WLs in the block almost equally [3],
the reliability impact of read disturbance significantly varies
across WLs in high-density 3D flash memory. Fig. 1 illustrates
two key factors contributing to the read-disturbance variations.
First, when reading a page, a high-density 3D flash chip
Vref
VpassH
BL1 BL2 BLn
VpassL
VpassL
VpassH
VpassL
VpassL
WL1
WL2
WL3
WL4
WL5
WL6
WL7
NAND
string Maximum # of tolerable reads
0 1000K
500K
Wordlines
(a) (b)
559K
Fig. 1. Key factors for asymmetry in read disturbance across WLs.
arXiv:2501.02517v1
[cs.AR]
5
Jan
2025
IEEE JOURNAL OF L
A
TEX CLASS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, FEBRUARY 2024 2
applies a higher Vpass (VpassH, approximately 0.4V higher
than VpassL [6]) to the two adjacent WLs compared to the
non-adjacent WLs (Fig. 1(a)). Based on the widely-known
Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling equation, the impact of
read disturbance is exponentially proportional to Vpass [3].
Consequently, reading a page leads to a higher reliability
impact on the data stored in adjacent WLs [6], [7]. Second,
read-disturbance tolerance varies significantly among WLs
due to inherent process variations in high-density 3D flash
memory [10]. Fig. 1(b) shows the maximum tolerable read
counts for WLs within a block when the block’s pages are
accessed uniformly. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the worst WL in
a block can tolerate only 403K reads before data corruption,
while the best WL can reliably endure 559K additional reads.
To quantify the asymmetry in read disturbance within a
high-density 3D block, we measure the raw bit error rate
(RBER) of WLs in a block after repeated read operations on
a real TLC flash chip. Fig. 2 illustrates the change in RBER
for 48 representative WLs in a block under two distinct read
patterns, PA and PB, where PA reads only the page at WL35,
which is adjacent to the worst WL (WL36) while PB reads
sequentially all pages in the block. As expected, the maximum
read count that a block can endure without data loss varies
significantly based on the read pattern. Under the pattern PA,
reading WL35 leads to a significant increase in the RBER of
its adjacent WLs (WL34 and WL36), resulting in uncorrectable
errors (i.e., RBER exceeding the ECC correction capability)
after just 54,560 reads. In contrast, the block can tolerate up
to 518,420 reliable reads under the pattern PB.
Limitations of Existing Solutions. To evaluate the effective-
ness of the conventional RR approach, we measure the number
of RR-induced page copies in two SSDs, both employing
the block-level RR, SSDreal and SSDideal. SSDreal is an SSD
composed of our tested high-density 3D flash memory, while
SSDideal is a hypothetical SSD where read disturbance is
symmetric; all non-target WLs in a block experience uniform
disturbance, with the tolerable read counts of all WLs set equal
to the median value shown in Fig. 1(b). In both SSDs, RCMAX
is conservatively set to ensure data reliability even under the
worst-case access pattern.
Fig. 3 compares the number of page copies from RR,
normalized to SSDideal, across two distinct P/E cycles under six
workloads [11]. (For a detailed description of the workloads,
see §IV.) From the results, we observe that the block-level RR
imposes significant lifetime/performance overhead to ensure
data reliability in modern high-density 3D flash memory. The
number of RR-induced page copies increases by 10.5×, and
15.4× on average compared to when read disturbance is
symmetric, at 1K, and 2K P/E cycles (PEC), respectively. Our
evaluation results highlight the fundamental limitations of the
block-level RR. Due to the heterogeneous reliability impact of
RBER RBER RBER
WL47 ECC
limit
After 54,560 reads
under pattern PA
WL35
(target)
WL0
WL36 (worst)
After 54,560 reads
under pattern PB
After 518,420 reads
under pattern PB
ECC
limit
ECC
limit
WL34
Fig. 2. Heterogeneous disturbance impact under different read patterns.
0
Normalized
#
of
RR
page
copies
10
20
30
40
50
Ali121 Ali124 Syn1 Syn2
Ali188 Ali206 Ali121 Ali124 Syn1 Syn2
Ali188 Ali206
1K PEC 2K PEC
SSDreal
Fig. 3. A comparison of the RR overhead between SSDreal and SSDideal.
read disturbance, data loss can occur at significantly lower RC
values under worst-case access patterns (Fig. 2). Consequently,
block-level RR must conservatively set RCMAX, leading to
frequent and unnecessary RR operations.
III. STRAW: STRESS-AWARE WL-BASED READ RECLAIM
To overcome the limitations of existing solutions, we pro-
pose STRAW, a novel WL-level RR technique. Unlike existing
RR techniques that invoke block-level RR based on a conser-
vative RCMAX, STRAW reclaims individual WLs only when
necessary, thereby significantly reducing the performance and
lifetime overheads from RR. To this end, we develop (i) a
new read-disturbance model that quantifies the heterogeneous
reliability impact of read disturbance (§III-A) and (ii) a
STRAW-enabled flash translation layer (FTL) that efficiently
estimates the actual read disturbance accumulated to each WL
(§III-B) by leveraging an approximate counting algorithm [8].
A. New Read-Disturbance Model
We develop a new read-disturbance model through compre-
hensive characterization of 160 real 3D TLC flash chips from
Samsung. Our proposed model quantifies two key factors that
contribute to the heterogeneous disturbance impact on non-
target WLs during a read operation: (i) the inherent process
variations across WLs [10] and (ii) read-disturbance asym-
metry between adjacent and non-adjacent WLs. To account
for the first factor with minimal overhead, we classify the
WLs within each block into four groups, Best, Good, Bad, and
Worst, based on their initial RBER values. We then measure
the maximum read count for each group across 19,200 blocks,
while varying PEC and read patterns.
Fig. 4 compares the maximum read counts of four WL
groups under different PEC and read patterns. A coordinate
(x, y) for each WL group indicates that the group’s worst WL
can endure up to y page reads on the same block (i.e., read
disturbance from the reads) when x% ((100−x)%) of the reads
are performed to (non-)adjacent WLs. We make three key
observations. First, reading a WL causes significantly more
disturbance (8.4× on average) to adjacent WLs compared to
non-adjacent WLs. Second, under the same operating condi-
tion, the ratio of read disturbance impact between non-adjacent
and adjacent WL reads maintains a consistent disturbance
rate α. For instance, at 2K PEC, the disturbance rate α is
8.7 for the Best group, indicating that reading the adjacent
WL of the worst WL in the Best group (WLBest
w ) incurs
8.7× more disturbance stress on WLBest
w compared to reading
the non-adjacent WL of WLBest
w . Third, the read-disturbance
tolerance of a WL group and the disturbance rate α vary
significantly depending on operating conditions, such as the
inherent reliability characteristics of the WLs and the PEC.
