PowerMove: Optimizing Compilation for Neutral
Atom Quantum Computers with Zoned Architecture
Jixuan Ruan*
j3ruan@ucsd.edu
University of California
San Diego, USA
Xiang Fang*
x8fang@ucsd.edu
University of California
San Diego, USA
Hezi Zhang
hez019@ucsd.edu
University of California
San Diego, USA
Ang Li
ang.li@pnnl.gov
Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory
Richland, USA
Travis Humble
humblets@ornl.gov
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, USA
Yufei Ding
yufeiding@ucsd.edu
University of California
San Diego, USA
Abstract
Neutral atom-based quantum computers (NAQCs) have re-
cently emerged as promising candidates for scalable quan-
tum computing, largely due to their advanced hardware ca-
pabilities, particularly qubit movement and the zoned archi-
tecture (ZA). However, fully leveraging these features poses
significant compiler challenges, as it requires addressing
complexities across gate scheduling, qubit allocation, qubit
movement, and inter-zone communication. In this paper, we
present PowerMove, an efficient compiler for NAQCs that
enhances the qubit movement framework while fully inte-
grating the advantages of ZA. By recognizing and leveraging
the interdependencies between these key aspects, Power-
Move unlocks new optimization opportunities, significantly
enhancing both scalability and fidelity. Our evaluation demon-
strates an improvement in fidelity by several orders of mag-
nitude compared to the state-of-the-art methods, with exe-
cution time improved by up to 3.46x and compilation time
reduced by up to 213.5x. We will open-source our code later
to foster further research and collaboration within the com-
munity.
1 Introduction
Quantum computing (QC) is swiftly evolving from a theoret-
ical concept into a tangible reality, with significant advance-
ments across various platforms over the past few decades [1,
6, 10, 13–15, 23, 26, 51]. Given the rapid progress and the
unique strengths of each platform, competition among these
platforms is expected to persist for the foreseeable future.
In recent years, neutral atom-based quantum computer
(NAQC) [6, 18, 21, 51] have emerged as a strong candidate
in the QC landscape, due to its unique hardware advantages.
These include impressive scalability (supporting up to 6100
qubits) [17, 18, 31, 51], long coherence times of several sec-
onds [3, 19, 52], and high-fidelity operations [6, 7, 19, 20,
27, 28], with single-qubit rotations and two-qubit CZ gates
achieving fidelities of up to 99.99% and 99.5%, respectively.
Beyond these fundamental features, NAQC offers the com-
pelling ability to move qubits collectively using AOD under
some constraints [7], enabling non-local connectivity and
dynamic layouts that facilitate parallel execution of CZ gates.
Once interacting qubit pairs are brought close together, a
global Rydberg laser [19, 28] can perform CZ gates between
each pair. This dynamic control has further led to the devel-
opment of the Zoned Architecture (ZA) [6], which divides
the system into distinct zones for specific tasks, such as
storage and computation (e.g., CZ gates), with qubits shut-
tled between zones as needed. Similar to classical architec-
tures with separate memory and processing units, this design
may enhance overall system performance. For example, non-
interacting qubits can be moved to a storage zone, where they
are preserved with negligible decoherence and are protected
from excitation errors induced by the Rydberg laser.
Several compilers have been developed [8, 42, 44, 46, 47]
to harness NAQC’s qubit movement capabilities. While these
approaches have made remarkable progress, they still fall
short of effectively exploiting the flexibility that qubit move-
ment offers. They either settle for a partially fixed layout [8,
46, 47] or struggle to handle fully dynamic layout transitions
in a scalable manner [42, 44]. Additionally, the potential of
the ZA remains unexplored due to its recent introduction,
and the limited use of movement capabilities restricts these
approaches from extending to this new setting. Our goal is to
unlock the full potential of dynamic layout transitions while
integrating ZA to further enhance compilation performance.
To achieve this goal, we first identify four key aspects
of the NAQC compilation problem. (1) Gate scheduling. CZ
gates are grouped into distinct stages, where gates within
the same stage act on disjoint qubits and can be executed
in parallel. (2) Qubit allocation. For each stage, qubits must
be strategically placed with appropriate spacing to enable
desired CZ gates while avoiding unwanted interactions dur-
ing Rydberg laser excitation. (3) Qubit movement. After each
stage, qubits are rearranged for the next stage through collec-
tive movements, which must comply with specific rules [6, 7].
1
arXiv:2411.12263v1
[quant-ph]
19
Nov
2024
1
2
3
4
Stage
Partition
CZ Block
Stage 1 Stage K
Schedule Stage 1' Stage K'
(Reordered)
...
...
Coll-Move Scheduler (Sec. 6)
AOD 1
Coll-Move
Parallel CZ of Stage K
Coll-Move
...
AOD N
Coll-Move
Coll-Move
...
...
Parallel CZ of Stage K+1
Continuous Router (Sec. 5)
Stage Scheduler (Sec. 4)
Stage K Stage K+1
Quantum Circuit
Gate
Scheduling
Qubit
Allocation
Qubit
Movement
Zoned
Architecture
NAQC Compilation
1 2
3 4
Interplay: 1,4 Interplay: 2,3 Interplay: 3,4
(b) Components of PowerMove
(a) Aspects of NAQC compilation
Interplay 1
2
3 4 5
6
7
8 9
10
Storage
Compute
1 2
3 4 5 6
7
Compute
8
9
10
Storage
Coll-
Moves
Rydberg
Laser
Figure 1. (a) Four key aspects of the NAQC compilation problem. (b) Overview of the PowerMove framework. The design of
each component is based on the interplay of multiple aspects of the problem.
(4) Zoned architecture (ZA). During layout transitions, non-
interacting qubits should be moved to the storage zone for
protection, while interacting qubits must be brought out of
storage for computation.
Handling all of these aspects simultaneously is highly
challenging due to the vast design space they create, and
we identified this as the core reason for the limitations of
previous approaches. Solver-based methods [42, 44] attempt
to tackle this space directly, but face scalability issues. Other
approaches [8, 46, 47] decompose the problem into sub-
problems, each addressing a single aspect. While this de-
composition leads to more efficient solutions, it overlooks
crucial optimization opportunities arising from the interde-
pendencies and synergies between these aspects.
We propose a novel NAQC compiler, PowerMove, to
effectively tackle this vast design space. By fully recognizing
and leveraging the interplays between the above key aspects,
we unlock new optimization opportunities that significantly
enhance both scalability and fidelity. Our solution consists
of three key components:
(1) Stage Scheduler. This component utilizes the interplay
between gate scheduling and the ZA. We observed that op-
timizing the execution order of stages can minimize qubit
interchange between the computation and storage zones
during layout transitions, thereby reducing inter-zone move-
ment overhead (see Sec. 4).
(2) Continuous Router. This component integrates qubit allo-
cation with qubit movement. While previous methods solely
used movement to change qubit allocation for CZ interac-
tions, we recognize that the current qubit allocation can also
guide movement decisions for the next stage. This interde-
pendence allows for the simultaneous determination of qubit
allocation and movements, enabling continuous transitions
between desired layouts without relying on intermediate
fixed layouts (see Sec. 5).
(3) Coll-Move Scheduler. This component leverages the inter-
play between qubit movement and the ZA. By optimizing
the execution order of collective movements (Coll-Moves),
it maximizes qubit dwell time in the storage zone, thus mini-
mizing decoherence. It also incorporates the scheduling of
multiple AOD arrays to further enhance movement paral-
lelism and reduce latency (see Sec. 6).
To summarize, our contribution of this paper is as follows:
• We propose PowerMove, a novel compiler for NAQC
that fully leverages qubit movement capabilities while
seamlessly integrating the newly developed ZA.
• We integrate the storage zone for the first time, effec-
tively eliminating excitation errors while minimizing
the associated overhead.
• We introduce a continuous router that enables direct
transitions between qubit layouts, significantly reduc-
ing movement overhead.
• We establish a stage scheduler and a Coll-Move sched-
uler that fully exploit the storage zone’s advantages
to minimize decoherence.
• Our evaluation demonstrates improvements of several
orders of magnitude in fidelity, a 1.71x to 3.46x reduc-
tion in execution time, and up to a 213.5x reduction in
compilation time compared to the current best NAQC
compilation framework.
2 Background
This section provides essential background information on
NA hardware capabilities and fidelity analysis.
2.1 NA Hardware Capabilities
We first introduce gate operations and qubit movement, which
are directly relevant to the fidelity analysis in Sec. 2.2. We
then discuss the zoned architecture of NA hardware, which
offers new opportunities for compiler optimization.
Gate Operations. NAQC supports high-fidelity single-qubit
(1Q) rotations and CZ gates, sufficient for universal quan-
tum computing [11]. 1Q gates are performed using qubit-
specific, parallel Raman pulses, achieving fidelity of 99.99%
with duration of ∼ 1𝜇𝑠 [6, 7, 19, 27], allowing for simulta-
neous execution across the qubit plane. CZ gates (specified
2
