𝝀-trim: Optimizing Function Initialization in
Serverless Applications With Cost-driven Debloating
Xuting Liu*
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
xutingl@seas.upenn.edu
Spyros Pavlatos*
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
pavlatos@seas.upenn.edu
Yuhao Liu
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
liuyuhao@seas.upenn.edu
Vincent Liu
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
liuv@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we focus on an often-overlooked component
of serverless application cold starts: monetary costs and
Function Initialization. Traditionally considered the user’s
responsibility, Function Initialization is billable and accounts
for more than 50% of the monetary cost associated with cold
starts in real-world machine-learning applications.
We introduce 𝜆-trim, a system that optimizes Python
serverless applications by eliminating redundant code while
maintaining correctness. To maximize cost savings, 𝜆-trim
leverages the typical serverless pricing model to prioritize
modules that significantly impact latency and memory us-
age. 𝜆-trim features an automated pipeline comprising a
static analyzer, a profiler specialized for the serverless pric-
ing model, and a debloater. The optimized application can
be directly deployed on serverless platforms, leading to sub-
stantial reductions in both latency and cost for cold starts.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →
Cloud computing.
Keywords: Serverless computing, cold starts, debloating
ACM Reference Format:
Xuting Liu*, Spyros Pavlatos*, Yuhao Liu, and Vincent Liu. 2025.
𝝀-trim: Optimizing Function Initialization in Serverless Applica-
tions With Cost-driven Debloating. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3 (ASPLOS ’25), March
30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3676642.3736129
*Denotes equal contribution and alphabetical ordering.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1080-3/2025/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676642.3736129
Function
Initialization
Function
Execution
Warm Starts
Cold Starts
4.44s 5.34s
Not Billed Billed
5.64s
Image
Transmission
Instance
Init
Figure 1. A typical breakdown of cold and warm starts for a
PyTorch ResNet invocation and the average execution time
of each phase. Function Initialization is responsible for up to
29% of total latency and 45% of the total bill in a cold start.
1 Introduction
Serverless computing is an increasingly popular paradigm
that allows clients to run their applications on cloud providers
without worrying about the prosaic but complex tasks of pro-
visioning, scaling, and maintaining VMs or containers [26].
Under the serverless abstraction, users provide a function to
the cloud provider, which handles everything else automati-
cally. The user is then billed per-MB of provisioned memory,
per-millisecond1 of request processing time; they only pay
for what they use. Idle time is free.
The lifecycle of a serverless function, depicted in Figure 1,
consists of three phases: instance/runtime setup time, Func-
tion Initialization, and Function Execution. User logic is pri-
marily contained within the Function Execution stage.
In this work, we call attention to, quantify, and address the
fact that, among these stages, Function Initialization plays
an outsized role in the overhead of serverless computing.
Even though this stage is not executed for every request, its
costs can be substantial, both in latency and resources, the
latter of which manifests as higher monetary costs to users.
One way that Function Initialization adds overhead is dur-
ing so-called cold starts, where the cloud platform is forced to
initialize—in the critical path—a new serverless instance in
response to an incoming request and insufficient existing ca-
pacity. This contrasts warm starts, where the cloud provider
can reuse a previously initialized VM/container. As many
others have also noted [23, 30, 45], these cold starts can be
common for some applications, and their latency penalty
can be substantial, accounting for up to an 80% increase
in latency compared to warm function execution. Within
1AWS Lambda pricing granularity. GCP rounds up to the nearest 100 ms,
and Azure rounds up to the nearest 1 s.
129
ASPLOS ’25, March 30-April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands Xuting Liu, Spyros Pavlatos, Yuhao Liu, and Vincent Liu
cold starts, Function Initialization is of particular concern
given trends toward more/heftier libraries (e.g., ML, scientific
computing, and image/video processing) [35] and scale-out
architectures that lead to very bursty work- loads [21].
In addition to latency, Function Initialization also differs
from other cold-start components in that cloud providers typ-
ically bill users for the time, as shown in Figure 12. There are
good reasons for this pricing strategy: not billing for initial-
ization could result in perverse incentives, e.g., users break-
ing up expensive computations into a sequence of𝑛 functions
where each does 1
𝑛 of the computation, and stores/loads par-
tial results—the billable work would be a no-op. The result,
however, is that for the ResNet application of Figure 1, ini-
tialization can be responsible for up to 45% of the total bill.
Finally, the overheads of Function Initialization can persist
even after the instance has been warmed, as large libraries
and data structures instantiated during initialization will
continue to occupy memory even if they are never used,
consuming resources that again manifest as high monetary
costs for every user request.
Prior work has looked at parts of this problem, especially
through the lens of optimizing cold start latency, e.g., through
OS improvements [6, 11, 20], better function scheduling [13,
32, 44, 45, 55], checkpoint/restore techniques [20, 46], and
others. Unfortunately, a fixation on just one part of the prob-
lem, like cold start latency, can lead to tradeoffs on the other
aspects (e.g., the resource costs of checkpoint/restore tech-
niques that are detailed in Section 8.6). The few approaches
that target both latency and monetary cost are largely man-
ual (e.g., developing lightweight libraries [47] or relatively
simple methods to refactor the application [30, 48, 50]).
This paper presents 𝜆-trim, a system that optimizes Python
serverless applications by profiling and eliminating unnec-
essary initialization operations. 𝜆-trim’s optimizations min-
imize the latency of cold starts and the monetary cost of
both cold and warm executions. 𝜆-trim operates entirely
as a pre-processing step at the application level—its output
is an optimized serverless application with a shorter Func-
tion Initialization phase and less memory footprint. It is,
thus, immediately deployable and remains compatible with
system-level efforts toward cold start optimization.
Under the hood, 𝜆-trim leverages a well-known technique
from the programming languages and software engineering
fields, Delta Debugging (DD) [53]. DD takes a divide-and-
conquer approach to finding the largest subset of the code
base that it can remove while producing correct results. In
each iteration, DD splits the program into multiple subsec-
tions and examines each subsection to determine whether
it is necessary for correct execution, repeating the process
until it reaches a minimal configuration.
2As we discuss in Section 2.1, some functions’ initialization is complimen-
tary, but this is not true in general.
Unfortunately, applying DD to every line of code in the
serverless function and its dependencies is impractical. A
contribution of 𝜆-trim is, thus, to leverage typical server-
less pricing models (via an estimate of marginal monetary
cost) to enable efficient targeting of DD-based debloating.
𝜆-trim’s system architecture features an automated pipeline
encompassing a static analyzer, serverless cost profiler, and
DD-based debloater. Our key contributions are as follows:
• We analyze the latency and cost breakdown and find the
initialization phase to be a significant overhead in many
serverless Python applications.
• We demonstrate—empirically—the substantial redundancy
in those initialization phases with 𝜆-trim.
• As part of 𝜆-trim, we introduce the first practical ad-
vanced Python debloater using a workflow specialized
for serverless platforms and their unique pricing models.
• We evaluate 𝜆-trim on real serverless applications and
reduce monetary costs by an average of ∼20% (cutting
many applications’ costs by >50%) while also improving
E2E latency by up to 2× and memory usage by up to 42%.
2 Background and Motivation
In traditional cloud computing models, users are responsible
for a wide range of system administration tasks not directly
related to their application logic, e.g., provisioning a batch of
VMs, specifying their resource profiles, deploying dependen-
cies, scaling the instance up and down with the workload,
and monitoring the application as it runs, among others.
Serverless computing is an alternative that promises to
free users from all the above concerns. Instead, users sim-
ply supply the cloud provider with a function containing
their application’s logic (commonly known as the serverless
function or lambda). The provider handles the rest.
This abstraction offers many benefits, including: (1) users
are relieved from the need to manage servers, (2) resources
are automatically scaled based on demand, and (3) users are
billed for only the resources they use and no more. This
paradigm has proven popular, with all large cloud providers
offering a range of options for serverless execution (e.g., AWS
Lambda, GCP Cloud Run functions, and Azure Functions).
The workflow for developing such applications is straight-
forward. Users write a function in their preferred program-
ming language, package the function code and any necessary
libraries into a suitable format (e.g., a container image or
ZIP file), and then upload it to the serverless platform. The
serverless platform manages provisioning and execution.
2.1 The Anatomy and Pricing of Lambda Execution
Lambdas are executed on-demand, invoked by a predefined
set of triggers such as incoming HTTP requests, event trig-
gers (e.g., a file upload or monitoring alert), and scheduled
timers. Serverless platforms ensure automatic scaling by dy-
namically launching new instances to handle invocations
and shutting them down when they are no longer needed.
130
