Shift Parallelism: Low-Latency, High-Throughput LLM
Inference for Dynamic Workloads
Mert Hidayetoglu, Aurick Qiao, Michael Wyatt, Jeff Rasley, Yuxiong He, and Samyam Rajbhandari
Snowflake AI Research
Abstract
Efficient parallelism is necessary for achieving low-latency,
high-throughput inference with large language models (LLMs).
Tensor parallelism (TP) is the state-of-the-art method for
reducing LLM response latency, however GPU communi-
cations reduces combined token throughput. On the other
hand, data parallelism (DP) obtains a higher throughput yet
is slow in response latency. Best of both worlds does not
exist, and it is not possible to combine TP and DP because
of the KV cache variance across the parallelisms.
We notice Sequence Parallelism (SP—Ulysses in training)
has similar properties as DP but with KV cache invariance.
We adapt SP to inference, and combine it with TP to get the
best of both worlds. Our solution: Shift Parallelism.
Shift Parallelism dynamically switches across TP and SP,
and minimizes latency in low traffic without losing through-
put in high traffic. The efficient GPU communications of
Shift Parallelism yields up to i) 1.51× faster response in in-
teractive workloads and ii) 50% higher throughput in batch
workloads, compared to a TP-only solution.
We evaluate Shift Parallelism with real-world production
traces with dynamic traffic patterns as well as synthetic
benchmarking patterns across models, context sizes, and
arrival rates. All results affirm the same: Shift Parallelism
has a better latency vs. throughput tradeoff than TP or DP,
and hence obtains low latency without degrading throughput
in dynamic workloads.
1 Introduction
LLM inference has become the dominant workload in AI as
its applications span agentic systems, chatbot (interactive)
applications, model post-training (e.g. reinforcement learn-
ing), and image/video generation. The efficiency of inference
systems is critical to both the performance and cost of AI ap-
plications. As of today, GPU parallelization is the prominent
way of enabling large-scale AI production, and advanced
multi-GPU parallelization techniques make nontrivial trade-
offs across key performance metrics.
The parallelism techniques for inference are largely inher-
ited from training, yet inference is different from training
in terms of workload characteristics. Training workloads
are typically homogeneous, stable, and do not care about
latency but only care about throughput. Inference, on the
contrary, is bursty and dynamic, and often has unpredictable
traffic patterns. Furthermore, different workloads have dif-
ferent performance requirements. As a result, leveraging
Llama-70B, 8xH200, FP8
4k input, 250 output tokens
TP—latency opt.
DP—throughput opt.
SP (new to inference)
Shift Parallelism (new)
Low Traffic
(interactive)
High Traffic
(batch)
Req./Sec.
Combined Throughput
(tokens/sec)
Response Speed
(input tok/sec per req)
Generation Rate
(output tok/sec per req)
2x
0x
1x
39.1k
99.1
37.4k
Figure 1. Comparison of response speed (#input tok./TTFT)
and generation rate (1/TPOT), and throughput (tokens/sec).
Shift Parallelism obtains a higher throughput than TP in
high traffic, and lower latency than TP and DP in low traffic.
parallelism techniques designed for training in inference
results in complex performance and cost trade-offs.
Inference Workload Characteristics
When people talk about inference systems, they often refer
to interactive workloads, or batch workloads.
Interactive workloads process requests with low con-
currency to minimize the completion time of each request.
The completion time latency is important when there is a
chain of interactions between the user and the LLM, such as
in REST applications. The completion latency depends on
the time to first token (TTFT)—and time per output token
(TPOT), which are both critical in real-time applications.
Batch workloads involve a number of requests to be
processed concurrently, and the latency of an individual re-
quest is not critical. For example, workloads such as batched
summarization or translation of hundreds or thousands of
documents can cause high-traffic bursts that require high
combined throughput of input and output tokens to mini-
mize the cost per token.
In enterprise systems, the request traffic pattern is often
mixed and dynamically changes over time in unpredictable
ways. In such dynamic settings, it is a challenge to optimize
for different traffic patterns simultaneously, since existing
parallelization techniques impose significant trade-offs.
Latency vs. Throughput vs. Cost Tradeoff
Existing parallelisms exhibit prohibitive latency vs. through-
put (cost) trade-offs, as explained below.
Tensor parallelism (TP) partitions the model weights
and computation in each layer. It has to synchronize the
1
arXiv:2509.16495v2
[cs.DC]
26
Jan
2026
Mert Hidayetoglu, Aurick Qiao, Michael Wyatt, Jeff Rasley, Yuxiong He, and Samyam Rajbhandari
Snowflake AI Research
Table 1. Performance tradeoffs of inference parallelisms.
(Ulysses)
embeddings across layers with costly all-reduce communi-
cations. By splitting model weights and computation across
GPUs, it optimizes for latency (i.e., TTFT and TPOT), yet
the communication overhead increases the cost (i.e., reduces
throughput).
Data parallelism (DP) parallelizes across request bound-
aries in embarrassingly parallel, providing high throughput.
Yet, DP cannot speed up work within a single request, and
therefore unsuitable for highly interactive workloads.
The first two rows of Table 1 show the performance trade-
offs of TP and DP. We do have the choice to deploy TP and
DP in separate nodes and route latency- and throughput-
oriented requests, respectively. However, duplicating the
node count (one for TP and one for DP) doubles the deploy-
ment cost and adds complexity.
Why can’t we combine both? A performant and low-cost
inference system should be able to switch between latency-
oriented and throughput-oriented parallelisms swiftly in a
single deployment based on traffic demands. But this is not
viable with TP and DP because they have different attention
layouts. Specifically, their KV cache memory layouts are
incompatible, and switching requires complex and costly
data movement.
However, in this work, we notice that Ulysses Sequence
Parallelism (SP) [7]—another form of parallelism developed
and used in training—can offer a potential solution to resolv-
ing the challenge. SP splits the input sequence across GPUs
to parallelize work within a single request to reduce TTFT.
Unlike TP, it avoids costly all-reduce communication, while
still achieving high GPU utilization. And while SP cannot
parallelize decoding steps, resulting in the worst TPOT com-
pared to TP and DP (Table 1), it has the same KV cache layout
as TP, allowing for dynamic switching to TP when TPOT
is critical. We call this dynamic approach Shift Parallelism,
which is the focus of this work.
Shift Parallelism dynamically chooses the parallelization
strategy between SP and TP based on the real-world traffic
pattern, identified by the number of batched tokens in each
iteration. By a given threshold, Shift Parallelism uses:
• TP for small batches—minimizing TPOT.
• SP for large batches—minimizing TTFT and achieving
near-optimal throughput.
This is possible because the KV cache memory layout re-
mains invariant between TP and SP, allowing Shift Paral-
lelism to switch modes seamlessly, based on batch size and
traffic patterns. More specifically, the KV cache layout does
not change when switching across SP and TP.
Figure 1 benchmarks the latency and throughput tradeoffs
of related parallelisms. Shift parallelism provides 1.5× higher
throughput than TP in high traffic and 1.5× faster response
in low traffic, 2× faster generation than DP in low traffic
while losing only 17% throughput in high traffic.
In this paper, we
1. We characterize inference workloads and identify la-
tency vs. throughput tradeoffs with existing inference
parallelization (TP, DP).
2. Adapt SP from training to inference and generalize
it for a diverse set of inference models supporting
GQA [2], load-balancing at small batch sizes, combina-
tion of TP, and KV cache replication when parallelism
degree is higher than number of KV heads.
3. Propose Shift Parallelism for dynamically switching
across SP and TP for mitigating latency vs throughput
tradeoff for dynamic workloads.
4. Test Shift Parallelism with real-world production work-
loads and evaluate the performance characteristics
via extensive benchmarking demonstrating up to 1.5×
faster response time with 50% throughput savings.
5. Open source our implementation along with other
SoTA techniques that are used in practice.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides more details about production traffic patterns high-
performance LLM inference. Section 3 presents SP and Shift
Parallelism. Section 4 evaluates the performance of proposed
techniques on real-life patterns. Section 5 about related work,
and Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 Background
2.1 Production Traffic Patterns
Today, LLMs are a foundational component of AI appli-
cations. A single deployment, such as Llama-3.3-70B, can
serve diverse use cases including sentiment analysis [12,
23], retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [5, 10], coding
agents [8, 22], and more. These heterogeneous use cases
produce dynamic traffic patterns that must be efficiently
managed by the underlying infrastructure. For example, a
coding agent typically issues a small number of repeated
Figure 2. Bursty workload.
2
