SuperOffload: Unleashing the Power of Large-Scale
LLM Training on Superchips
Xinyu Lian
SSAIL Lab, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Masahiro Tanaka
Anyscale
San Francisco, CA, USA
Olatunji Ruwase
Snowflake
Bellevue, WA, USA
Minjia Zhang
SSAIL Lab, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Abstract
The emergence of Superchips represents a significant ad-
vancement in next-generation AI hardware. These Super-
chips employ a tightly coupled heterogeneous architecture
that integrates GPU and CPU on the same package, which
offers unprecedented computational power. However, there
has been scant research investigating how LLM training ben-
efits from this new architecture. In this work, for the first
time, we study LLM training solutions based on offloading
for Superchips. We observe important differences between
Superchips and traditional loosely-coupled GPU-CPU archi-
tecture, which necessitate revisiting prevailing assumptions
about offloading. Based on that, we present SuperOffload,
a Superchip-centric offloading system that simultaneously
uses Hopper GPU, Grace CPU, and NVLink-C2C intercon-
nect more efficiently. SuperOffload accomplishes this via a
combination of techniques, such as adaptive weight offload-
ing, bucketization repartitioning, Superchip-aware casting,
speculative execution, and a highly optimized Adam opti-
mizer for Grace CPUs. Our evaluation of SuperOffload on
NVIDIA GH200 demonstrates up to 2.5× throughput im-
provement compared to state-of-the-art offloading-based
systems, enabling training of up to 25B model on a single Su-
perchip while achieving high training throughput. We also
extend SuperOffload with ZeRO-style data parallelism and
DeepSpeed-Ulysses sequence parallelism, enabling training
of 13B model with sequence lengths up to 1 million tokens
on 8 GH200 while achieving 55% MFU.
1 Introduction
The impressive capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs)
have spurred significant research and industry efforts [1,
33, 43, 63, 68] to optimize the resource and time costs of
training state-of-the-art LLMs. A large fraction of this work is
motivated by the memory wall challenge of scaling LLMs [14]
– the disparity between exponential growth in model sizes
and relatively slower increase in hardware memory capacity
and bandwidth [24, 52]. Consequently, training LLMs is often
constrained by limited GPU memory.
When LLM training exceeds a single GPU’s memory ca-
pacity, practitioners often employ a variety of distributed
techniques, such as ZeRO-style data parallelism [51], tensor-
slicing parallelism [60], pipeline parallelism [18, 36, 37], and
sequence parallelism [22, 29], to shard model and data states
across multiple GPUs. However, the large number of GPUs
required by these methods poses a significant bottleneck for
researchers and institutions with modest GPU budgets.
Yet, enabling training of LLMs with a limited number of
GPUs is critical in many scenarios. Beyond pre-training,
LLMs often reach their full potential through additional
post-training phases, such as long context extension [8, 33],
continuous training [28, 57, 61], supervised fine-tuning [6],
instruction tuning [70], and human preference alignment
techniques such as RLHF [44] and DPO [50], all of which
require model training, even when users have significantly
fewer GPUs than used for pre-training.
Among different approaches, offloading techniques have
become a promising solution to reduce GPU requirements
for large-scale LLM training [32, 52, 55, 72]. These methods
offload a portion of the model states and computation from
GPU to CPU, effectively utilizing both to enable large-scale
LLM training without excessive GPU usage. As a result, of-
floading is supported by major DL training frameworks such
as PyTorch-FSDP [73] and DeepSpeed [52, 55].
While showing promising results, existing offloading so-
lutions are based on one key assumption: the GPU is an ac-
celerator connected to the CPU via PCIe, which has limited
communication bandwidth (e.g., 32GB/s for PCIe-Gen4). Due
to this bandwidth limitation, prior work primarily focuses
on optimizing data transfers between GPU and CPU to avoid
PCIe becoming a major performance bottleneck [48, 52, 55].
However, hardware vendors have embarked on the develop-
ment of a new class of high-end tightly coupled hardware
architecture in their product roadmaps [41], e.g., NVIDIA
Grace Hopper GH200 [42] and AMD MI300A [2], which
herald a paradigm shift in deep learning infrastructure.
Take NVIDIA’s Grace Hopper Superchip (GH200) as an
example. It integrates a Hopper H100 GPU and an ARM-
based Grace CPU on the same package through the NVLink-
Chip2Chip (C2C) interconnect, with GPU-CPU bandwidth
reaching a staggering 900 GB/s—30× increase over tradi-
tional PCIe connections. Moreover, multiple Superchips can
1
arXiv:2509.21271v1
[cs.LG]
25
Sep
2025
Xinyu Lian, Masahiro Tanaka, Olatunji Ruwase, and Minjia Zhang
be connected to form a large-scale tightly coupled system,
which offers fast and low latency interaction between differ-
ent classes of chiplets. Given the tightly coupled hardware
architecture, recent work has started benchmarking Super-
chips [11, 19, 58] and how to best program them [69]. How-
ever, efficient utilization of Superchips for offloading-based
LLM training has not yet been studied in depth.
In this work, we investigate software optimizations to
train LLMs in the era of Superchips. We find that existing
offloading methods, designed under the assumption of lim-
ited PCIe bandwidth, perform suboptimally on Superchips.
In particular, off-the-shelf solutions severely underutilize the
Hopper GPU, Grace CPU, and C2C bandwidth. For example,
prior work often adopts a greedy algorithm for data transfer
in mixed-precision training, transferring only low-precision
data between CPU and GPU to minimize PCIe communica-
tion volume in order to maximize training efficiency. Our
detailed analysis reveals that these common assumptions do
not hold true for Superchips.
Contribution. This paper addresses a pressing need to
harness the power of Superchips for training LLMs. Con-
cretely, we take a leap forward and introduce SuperOffload,
a Superchip-centric offloading system that delivers excel-
lent training performance on NVIDIA GH200 Superchips.
SuperOffload accomplishes this via a combination of tech-
niques, such as adaptive weight-stationary and weight-flow
offloading (§ 4.2), fine-grained bucketization repartitioning
(§ 4.3), speculation-then-validation support to overlap com-
pute and communication (§ 4.4), Superchip-aware typecasting
for mixed-precision training (§ 4.5), and highly optimized
GraceAdam for Grace Arm CPUs (§ 4.6). To our knowledge,
this is the first work that systematically optimizes LLM train-
ing for Superchip architectures, maximizing the utilization
of Hopper GPU, Grace CPU, and C2C interconnect, simulta-
neously.
We validate our design through comprehensive experi-
ments. SuperOffload achieves a 2.5× throughput improve-
ment over state-of-the-art offloading solutions and outper-
forms GPU-only approaches across all tested model sizes,
which challenges the conventional wisdom that offloading
often comes at the cost of performance penalty. SuperOf-
fload also enables 25B-parameter model training on a single
Superchip, which is 7× larger than GPU-only solutions.
In addition, we validate our design by integrating Super-
Offload with ZeRO-style data parallelism [51], which allows
SuperOffload to extend to multi-Superchip training settings.
Specifically, SuperOffload enables LLM training with 50B
parameters using only four Superchips, which is 2.5× larger
than the largest model trainable with ZeRO-Offload and
FSDP-Offload, while achieving up to 3× higher training
throughput.
We also extend SuperOffload to support long-sequence
training, termed SuperOffload-Ulysses, via integration with
import torch
...
...
model = BuildModel(config)
optimizer = Optimizer(model)
...
...
for batch in batches:
loss = model(batch)
loss.backward()
optimizer.step()
import torch
import SuperOffload
...
model = BuildModel(config)
optimizer = Optimizer(model)
model = SuperOffload.init(
model, optimizer)
for batch in batches:
loss = model(batch)
model.backward()
model.step()
Figure 1. SuperOffload can be enabled with a few lines of
change. The code on left shows a standard training pipeline,
while the right shows the same pipeline with SuperOffload.
Ulysses-style sequence parallelism [22]. This unlocks new
possibilities for training or fine-tuning LLMs with long se-
quence lengths. Specifically, SuperOffload-Ulysses supports
training sequences 8× longer than Ulysses and enables the
training of a 13B model with up to a million tokens using
only 8 GH200 Superchips, while achieving 55% MFU. To
enhance usability, SuperOffload has been integrated with
DeepSpeed [53], a popular open-source DL training library.
Users can enable SuperOffload through a few lines, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1, without model code refactoring.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 The Emergence of Superchips
GPUs were initially developed as accelerators loosely-coupled
with CPUs. Driven by the need to support the next genera-
tion of AI systems, NVIDIA introduced GH200 Grace Hopper
Superchip [42], a groundbreaking processor that integrates
a tightly-coupled Hopper GPU and Grace CPU on the same
package with high-bandwidth NVLink Chip-2-Chip (C2C)
interconnect, as shown in Fig. 2. Recently, NVIDIA also an-
nounced GB200 [41], the next-generation Superchip that has
a tightly-coupled Blackwell GPU with Grace CPU to deliver
unprecedented performance and efficiency for AI and other
advanced computing fields. Other hardware vendors, such as
AMD, have released AMD Instinct MI300A Superchip [2] that
connects 6 AMD CDNA3 GPU chiplets and 3 AMD Zen4 x86
CPU chiplets through AMD’s 4th Gen Infinity interconnect
using 3D stacking technology.
Despite being a new architecture, Superchips have already
been adopted in large-scale supercomputing clusters world-
wide, including France’s EXA1-HE [21], Poland’s Helios [16],
Switzerland’s Alps [64], Germany’s JUPITER [23], the United
States’ NCSA [9, 38], and Japan’s Miyabi [20]. Notably, the
Alps supercomputer has integrated over 2,000 GH200 nodes
and Isambard-AI supercomputer plans to deploy over 5,000
GH200 nodes to enhance computational capabilities. The
GH200 Superchip is also available through cloud service
providers such as Amazon Web Services [59], Microsoft
Azure [5], and Lambda [26], offering flexible options for or-
ganizations seeking high-performance computing resources.
2
