arXiv:2506.22958v1
[quant-ph]
28
Jun
2025
QTurbo: A Robust and Efficient Compiler for Analog
Quantum Simulation
Junyu Zhou
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
junyuzh@seas.upenn.edu
Yuhao Liu
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
liuyuhao@seas.upenn.edu
Shize Che
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
shizeche@seas.upenn.edu
Anupam Mitra
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
Berkeley, USA
AnupamMitra@lbl.gov
Efekan Kökcü
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
Berkeley, USA
ekokcu@lbl.gov
Ermal Rrapaj
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
Berkeley, USA
ermalrrapaj@lbl.gov
Costin Iancu
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
Berkeley, USA
cciancu@lbl.gov
Gushu Li
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
gushuli@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
Analog quantum simulation leverages native hardware dy-
namics to emulate complex quantum systems with great ef-
ficiency by bypassing the quantum circuit abstraction. How-
ever, conventional compilation methods for analog simula-
tors are typically labor-intensive, prone to errors, and com-
putationally demanding. This paper introduces QTurbo, a
powerful analog quantum simulation compiler designed to
significantly enhance compilation efficiency and optimize
hardware execution time. By generating precise and noise-
resilient pulse schedules, our approach ensures greater accu-
racy and reliability, outperforming the existing state-of-the-
art approach.
1 Introduction
Quantum computing leverages quantum mechanics to solve
complex problems beyond classical capabilities, with appli-
cations in quantum chemistry [26], combinatorial optimiza-
tion [14], and cryptography [32, 33]. Among these, quantum
Hamiltonian simulation [16] is one of the most fundamental
and promising problems, crucial for understanding quantum
many-body systems, modeling chemical reactions, and de-
signing new materials [1, 5, 9, 26, 29]. There are two main ap-
proaches: digital and analog. Digital quantum simulation [15]
uses quantum gates to construct a circuit that approximates
Hamiltonian time evolution, often via Suzuki-Trotter decom-
position [19]. However, digital quantum simulation requires
millions of gate operations even for medium-sized systems.
For example, Childs et al. [8] shows that simulating a simple
system of around 100 qubits requires around 1010 logical
gates before error correction encoding.
Target Hamiltonian Global Mixed
System
SimuQ
Simulator
Global Linear
System
Compile Faster
Local Mixed
Systems
Execution Shorter
Pulse
Refinement
More Accurate
QTurbo Section 4 Section 5 Section 6
Input Hamiltonian expression Instructions on Simulator
(baseline)
Figure 1. Comparision between the proposed QTurbo com-
piler and the baseline SimuQ [30]
On the other hand, analog quantum simulation [4] has
garnered increasing interest due to its ability to emulate
the behavior of a target quantum system directly. Unlike
the digital approach, analog quantum simulation bypasses
the quantum circuit abstraction and directly exploits the na-
tive tunable Hamiltonian of the quantum hardware [39] to
mimic a specific Hamiltonian’s dynamics continuously. Ana-
log quantum simulation has thus become a powerful tool for
studying complex quantum phenomena. For example, QuEra
has studied phases of matter [13] and solved combinatorial
optimization problems [12] on its Rydberg atom-based 256-
qubit computer Aquila [39]. Recently, Google also studied
physics experiments with analog quantum simulation on its
superconducting quantum processor [2]. Additionally, er-
ror mitigation techniques have been investigated for analog
quantum simulation [27].
1
Junyu Zhou, Yuhao Liu, Shize Che, Anupam Mitra, Efekan Kökcü, Ermal Rrapaj, Costin Iancu, and Gushu Li
Despite the promising potential of analog quantum simu-
lation, the development of compilation techniques for ana-
log simulation programs remains in its early stages. Cur-
rently, the only publicly available software framework is
SimuQ [30], to the best of our knowledge. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, SimuQ maps a target quantum system to a quan-
tum simulator’s instruction set by formulating and solving a
global mixed equation system, ultimately producing pulse
schedules for the analog simulation device. This framework
establishes a unified, solver-based compilation pipeline that
translates user-defined Hamiltonians into low-level hard-
ware controls. However, the SimuQ compiler faces two criti-
cal challenges that limit its efficiency and reliability. First,
the equation system used by SimuQ to determine pulse sched-
ules solves all variables simultaneously, inherently leading
to a large-scale mixed continuous–binary optimization prob-
lem and an exponentially large search space with a very long
compilation time. Second, the length of the compiled analog
pulse sequence is not deterministic, usually far from optimal,
and can vary unpredictably with different solver conditions.
In some cases, SimuQ even fails to yield a solution.
In this paper, our objective is to develop a fast and effec-
tive compiler that can compile and optimize the mapping
from the input Hamiltonian onto an analog quantum simu-
lator. Our key observation is that there exists a hierarchical
structure in the seemingly monolithic, large mixed equa-
tion system in the analog simulation compilation. Instead of
directly solving all the Hamiltonian controls, we can decom-
pose the compilation into multiple stages with intermediate
variables. Moreover, the tunable terms on the analog quan-
tum simulator are not always dependent on each other, and
it is possible to turn the large equation system into multiple
smaller local equation systems that are easier to solve.
To this end, we propose QTurbo, an efficient and robust
compilation framework for analog quantum simulation. The
workflow of QTurbo is illustrated in Fig. 1. First, QTurbo op-
timizes the construction of the equation system for pulse de-
sign by decomposing the global mixed equation system into
a global linear equation system and several localized mixed
equation systems. This approach substantially enhances the
equation-solving process by reducing computational com-
plexity and improving scalability. Second, when solving the
localized mixed equation systems, QTurbo enhances pulse
execution efficiency by leveraging variable constraints—such
as the maximum amplitude of a laser beam—to determine
the shortest achievable overall evolution time, thereby ensur-
ing operation within coherence constraints and maximizing
simulation reliability. Third, QTurbo introduces an iterative
refinement process to minimize error propagation across
both linear and localized mixed equation systems, thereby
reducing the error of compiled pulse schedules and improv-
ing fidelity in analog quantum simulations. Consequently,
QTurbo can efficiently handle compiling large-scale quan-
tum system onto analog quantum simulator with shorter
pulse and higher approximation accuracy.
Our experimental results indicate that, compared with
the baseline SimuQ [30], QTurbo achieves around 600× (up
to 1600×) acceleration in compilation time and scales effec-
tively to larger systems. Additionally, the generated pulses
are 51% (up to 90%) shorter, and our pulse schedules demon-
strate a 72% (up to 100%) improvement in compilation accu-
racy. These enhancements directly translate into significant
noise suppression on real device. We test two target quantum
systems using QuEra’s Aquila analog quantum computer,
achieving an average error reduction of 51%, with a maxi-
mum reduction of up to 94% in the measurement results.
Our major contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We proposed QTurbo, an efficient and effective com-
piler optimization framework for analog quantum sim-
ulation protocol.
2. QTurbo introduces several key compiler designs and
optimizations that can reduce compilation time, re-
duce pulse execution time, and improve compilation
accuracy.
3. Our evaluation demonstrates that QTurbo outperforms
the baseline SimuQ by significantly reducing both
compilation time and actual device execution time
across various benchmarks and architectures, and
markedly enhancing actual device performance.
2 Preliminary
This section introduces the background knowledge of analog
quantum simulation and the state-of-the-art compilation
framework. Interested readers are encouraged to read [17,
28, 30] for further detailed information.
2.1 Analog Quantum Simulation
The evolution of a quantum system is governed by its Hamil-
tonian 𝐻 according to the Schrödinger equation:
𝑖ℏ
𝑑
𝑑𝑡
|Ψ(𝑡)⟩ = 𝐻|Ψ(𝑡)⟩.
Analog quantum simulation (AQS) is a strategy used to study
the behavior of such complex quantum systems by construct-
ing another controllable quantum system that directly mim-
ics the behavior of the system of interest.
Figure 1 shows this simulation process. Suppose 𝐻𝑡𝑎𝑟 is
the Hamiltonian of the target physical system to be simu-
lated. We need to tune the pulses in the quantum processor
(the simulator) to adjust its Hamiltonian 𝐻𝑠𝑖𝑚, and approx-
imate the target Hamiltonian 𝐻𝑡𝑎𝑟 using 𝐻𝑠𝑖𝑚. Finally, the
measurement result of this quantum device can be used to
infer the information about target system.
2
