LOOPRAG: Enhancing Loop Transformation Optimization with
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
Yijie Zhi
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Yayu Cao
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Jianhua Dai
Zhejiang Institute of Administration
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Xiaoyang Han
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Jingwen Pu
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Qingran Wu
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Sheng Cheng
Beijing ShenZhou Aerospace
Software Technology Ltd.
Beijing, Beijing, China
Ming Cai
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Abstract
Loop transformations are semantics-preserving optimization
techniques applied at the source level, widely used in com-
pilers to maximize objectives such as vectorization and par-
allelism. Despite decades of research, applying the optimal
composition of loop transformations remains challenging
due to inherent complexities, including dependency analysis
and cost modeling for optimization objectives.
Recent studies have explored the potential of Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) for code optimization. However, our
key observation is that LLMs often struggle with effective
loop transformation optimization, frequently leading to er-
rors or suboptimal optimization, thereby missing significant
opportunities for performance improvements.
To bridge this gap, we propose LOOPRAG, a novel
retrieval-augmented generation framework designed to
guide LLMs in performing effective loop optimization on
Static Control Part (SCoP). We introduce a parameter-driven
method to harness loop properties, which trigger various
loop transformations, and generate diverse yet legal exam-
ple codes serving as a demonstration source. To effectively
obtain the most informative demonstrations, we propose a
loop-aware algorithm based on loop features, which balances
similarity and diversity for code retrieval. To enhance correct
and efficient code generation, we introduce a feedback-based
iterative mechanism that incorporates compilation, testing
and performance results as feedback to guide LLMs. Each
optimized code generated by LOOPRAG undergoes muta-
tion, coverage and differential testing to perform equivalence
checking.
We evaluate LOOPRAG on PolyBench, TSVC and LORE
benchmark suites, and compare it against compilers (GCC-
Graphite, Clang-Polly, Perspective and ICX) and representa-
tive LLMs (DeepSeek and GPT-4). The results demonstrate
average speedups over compilers of up to 11.20×, 14.34×,
and 9.29× for PolyBench, TSVC, and LORE, respectively, and
speedups over base LLMs of up to 11.97×, 5.61×, and 11.59×.
Figure 1. Percentage of code optimization results generated
by GPT-4 compared to PLuTo on PolyBench [42] and TSVC
[10]. All codes are compiled using GCC. ↑ and ↓ indicate
performance that outperforms and underperforms PLuTo,
respectively. ≠ represents code that is not equivalent in se-
mantics to the original.
1 Introduction
Loop transformation is a critical task in code optimization
research, altering the execution order of statements in a
semantics-preserving manner at source level to improve
performance. However, applying the optimal composition
of loop transformations remains a long-standing challenge,
that requires a deeper understanding of the code’s logic and
greater context awareness [12, 15].
With the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs),
recent studies have explored their high-level semantic un-
derstanding and contextual analysis capabilities for code
optimization, such as auto-vectorization [46] and OpenMP
directives prediction [44]. Their findings indicate that LLMs
demonstrate potential in code optimization tasks. However,
their current capabilities are not yet sufficient, and significant
improvements in correctness and performance are required.
To evaluate the performance of LLMs compared to compil-
ers, we conduct an empirical study by prompting GPT-4 [39]
and employing the source-to-source optimization compiler
PLuTo [8] to perform loop transformation on Static Control
Part (SCoP) in C program (Figure 1). The results indicate that,
1
arXiv:2512.15766v1
[cs.PL]
12
Dec
2025
compared to PLuTo, GPT-4 frequently misses optimization
opportunities for achieving optimal loop transformations
and struggles to generate semantically equivalent programs.
A possible explanation is that LLMs lack intrinsic mecha-
nisms (e.g., cost models or heuristics in compilers) to predict
performance impact, which limits their abilities of applying
profitable loop transformations.
Motivated by In-Context Learning (ICL) [9], the optimiza-
tion ability of LLMs can be enhanced by incorporating in-
formative demonstrations into the prompt, guiding them
to learn potential optimal transformation sequences for the
target code. For example, Listing 1 in §2.2 can achieve 71.60×
speedup as compared to the result generated by GPT-4 in Fig-
ure 1 through demonstrations in §6.5. Hence, we highlight
the critical role of providing informative demonstrations to
guide LLMs in performing efficient code optimization.
As a result, a large-scale dataset containing diverse exam-
ple codes and their optimized versions in SCoP generated
by an optimization compiler using various loop transforma-
tions is an essential resource and can serve as a demonstra-
tion source. Although there are plenty of loop code datasets
[13, 17] and loop generators [7, 35], they are limited in pro-
viding compositions of loop transformations, resulting in a
lack of diverse demonstrations. Based on the observation
that diverse loop properties (e.g., loop structure and data
dependence) can trigger various loop transformations, we
aim to produce example codes at scale by incorporating loop
properties with diversity. However, due to interdependencies
among loop properties, contradictions arise when the val-
ues of loop properties are assigned randomly. To solve this
problem, we propose a parameter-driven method to sys-
tematically harness loop properties through loop parameters
and generate diverse yet legal example codes.
Another significant challenge is to identify the most appro-
priate example codes in SCoP. We aim to retrieve example
codes based on the semantic similarity between example
and target code. However, existing retrieval methods (e.g.,
BM25 [43], GIST [45] and BGE [54]) prioritize text features
over the code semantics. Loop properties can reflect seman-
tic information relevant to loop transformation, but using
all of them in retrieval may lead to redundancy. Therefore,
we extract loop features from loop properties and present a
loop-aware algorithm that balances similarity and diver-
sity for retrieval. These retrieved example codes and their
optimized versions are integrated into demonstrations to
prompt LLMs in generating optimized codes.
To enhance correct and efficient code generation, we in-
troduce a feedback-based iterative mechanism that in-
corporates compilation results, testing results and perfor-
mance rankings into prompts as informative feedback to
guide LLMs. These three types of feedback are obtained dur-
ing iterative generation process. However, verifying whether
loop transformations preserve the original semantics is chal-
lenging, as proving semantic equivalence is a long-standing
and undecidable problem [21]. Existing methods [5, 36] are
still unable to handle real-world programs with complex
structures or address the black-box nature of LLM genera-
tion. Therefore, instead of relying on theoretical proofs that
account for data and control dependencies, we directly test
the specific generated outputs while performing optimiza-
tion through LLMs. In order to cover as many corner cases as
possible, we adopt techniques from compiler testing, includ-
ing mutation, coverage and differential testing for semantic
equivalence checking.
In this paper, we propose LOOPRAG, a novel retrieval-
augmented generation (RAG) framework for loop trans-
formation optimization in SCoP. LOOPRAG aims to guide
LLMs in learning potential optimal transformations through
demonstrations while preserving their inherent optimiza-
tion capabilities. We evaluate LOOPRAG by comparing it
with four compilers (GCC-Graphite[41], Clang-Polly[27],
Perspective[3] and ICX), two representative LLMs (DeepSeek
[20] and GPT-4), and two LLM-based models (PCAOT
[44] and LLM-Vectorizer [46]), respectively. Our approach
achieves a significant boost in program execution efficiency.
For compilers, the average speedups reach up to 11.20×,
14.34×, and 9.29× on PolyBench, TSVC, and LORE [13], re-
spectively. For base LLMs, the average speedups are up to
11.97×, 5.61×, and 11.59× on the same benchmarks. For LLM-
based models, the average speedups are up to 8.10× and
5.97× on PolyBench and TSVC, respectively.
2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Loop Properties and SCoP
The modeling of loops is essential when synthesizing di-
verse example codes. There are three types of loop properties
worth concerning in the modeling process.
The first type refers to loop structure, which includes the
number of statements, loop bounds, loop depth (i.e., loop
levels), and loop schedule. Loop schedule [19] defines the
execution order of statements and can be represented in vari-
ous forms (e.g., 2d+1 form and schedule tree [51]). The value
in constant dimension of loop schedule decides whether the
loop is perfect, where all statements are located in the inner-
most loop, or imperfect, where not all statements reside in
the innermost level.
The second type is related to data dependence, considering
the number of dependence, dependence type and dependence
distance [2, 56]. Based on the relationship between opera-
tions, there are three types of data dependence: RAW (read
after write), WAW (write after write), and WAR (write af-
ter read). Regarding the relationship between iterations, the
dependence distance characterizes the difference between
2
