Accepted to ASPLOS, 2026
A Programming Model for Disaggregated Memory over
CXL
Gal Assa
Technion
Israel
galassa@technion.ac.il
Moritz Lumme
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
moritz.lumme@inf.ethz.ch
Lucas Bürgi
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
buergiluc@student.ethz.ch
Michal Friedman
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
michal.friedman@inf.ethz.ch
Ori Lahav
Tel Aviv University
Israel
orilahav@tau.ac.il
Abstract
CXL (Compute Express Link) is an emerging open industry-
standard interconnect between processing and memory de-
vices that is expected to revolutionize the way systems are
designed. It enables cache-coherent, shared memory pools
in a disaggregated fashion at unprecedented scales, allowing
algorithms to interact with various storage devices using
simple loads and stores. While CXL unleashes unique oppor-
tunities, it also introduces challenges of data management
and crash consistency. For example, CXL currently lacks
an adequate programming model, making it impossible to
reason about the correctness and behavior of systems on top.
In this work, we present CXL0, the first programming
model for concurrent programs over CXL. We propose a
high-level abstraction for memory accesses and formally
define operational semantics. We demonstrate that CXL0
captures a wide range of current and future CXL setups and
perform initial measurements on real hardware. To illustrate
the usefulness of CXL0, we present a general transformation
that enhances any linearizable concurrent algorithm with
durability in a distributed partial-crash setting. We believe
that this work will serve as a stepping stone for systems
design and programming on top of CXL.
Keywords: CXL; Programming models; Disaggregated mem-
ory
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Reference Format:
Gal Assa, Moritz Lumme, Lucas Bürgi, Michal Friedman, and Ori
Lahav. 2026. A Programming Model for Disaggregated Memory
over CXL. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
With the increasing demand for storage in the cloud and
recent improvements in interconnects [52], disaggregated
memory has become a viable solution [4, 16, 18, 27, 30, 49,
50, 55, 60, 75]. In disaggregated systems, compute nodes are
separated from memory nodes. This offers greater flexibility,
scalability, and resilience compared to traditional architec-
tures [2, 30]. Rather than equipping a node to meet peak
demand, it can be provisioned with enough memory to sat-
isfy common needs, and additional memory is provided by
other nodes during times of high load. As a result, data can
be spread over multiple machines, and data transfers can
become a major bottleneck [22, 23, 30, 55].
Compute Express Link (CXL) is an emerging standard
which aims to facilitate efficient data transfer within data-
centers. Several cloud hyperscalers are involved in its devel-
opment, and it is expected by many to become the future
industry standard for data-center interconnects [68]. CXL
supports accessing external storage and caching data from
remote nodes in a coherent manner, which is a significant
change compared to current architectures [20]. Furthermore,
CXL provides a uniform abstraction for accessing all types
of memory, such as DRAM and SSD, across the system via
simple loads and stores at cache line granularity. This allows
the entire memory domain of the participating machines to
be modeled as a large, unified shared main memory [50].
These opportunities also present new challenges. As a cen-
tralized system becomes distributed and coherent, two key
assumptions no longer hold. First, heterogeneous compute
units access the same memory, so the outcome of concurrent
operations is not governed by a single memory model. Sec-
ond, the system is no longer a single failure domain. Instead,
nodes may crash independently. Special attention is required
to ensure correctness under these conditions.
arXiv:2407.16300v3
[cs.DC]
24
Jan
2026
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Gal Assa, Moritz Lumme, Lucas Bürgi, Michal Friedman, and Ori Lahav
Failure-aware programming has been subject to vast re-
search effort, primarily in the context of full-system crashes [17,
29, 48, 70]. The emergence of non-volatile main memory
(NVMM), as a persistent, moderately fast, and byte-addressable
medium, gave rise to both theoretical and practical endeav-
ors. Correctness criteria [10, 11, 33, 44, 54], data structures
[33, 66, 69, 79], verification approaches [1, 12, 28, 37, 38, 47],
and transactional memory frameworks [7, 15, 21, 63] were
suggested to benefit from the new technology. Although
NVMM has been deprecated as a standalone product [42],
it is expected to remain part of the memory hierarchy with
CXL [26]. However, existing solutions are not automatically
transferrable, because CXL inflates the system model, al-
lowing multiple machines to share the same volatile and
persistent memory. As these machines can be CPUs, GPUs,
FPGAs, or any type of accelerator, an adequate programming
model is required to correctly utilize this new technology.
Despite the expectation of CXL’s wide adoption, there
is currently no general programming model. This leaves
programmers without answers to crucial questions. For ex-
ample, it is unclear what consistency guarantees memory
accesses provide, or whether the local memory model is pre-
served over the communication protocol. Moreover, existing
multi-threaded programs for shared memory do not remain
correct in the disaggregated setting, and one urgent area of
investigation is how to correctly port this legacy code.
This work aims to close these gaps. We propose an ab-
straction of CXL’s memory operations and define CXL0 as a
formal programming model on top of that abstraction. Both
stem from a rigorous analysis of the CXL specification [20].
We capture a system model with distributed, coherent, shared
memory, that allows for subsystem crashes. Furthermore,
we model each node in the system as a subsystem that emits
sequences of CXL transactions, thus abstracting away the
effect of the internal memory model. Using CXL0 as a tool
to reason about the correctness and behavior of concurrent
executions, we show that it applies to a wide range of current
and future CXL setups. We also address the question of how
to design concurrent programs for this new system model.
Shared memory programming in a multi-processor, disag-
gregated memory environment with independent failures is
a challenging task. We identify common pitfalls and demon-
strate how to mitigate them using a general transformation
that equips linearizable algorithms with fault tolerance un-
der CXL0. Our transformation enhances legacy code with
resilience to spontaneous subsystem failures, even for algo-
rithms that are not failure-aware.
In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows:
• We provide a high-level abstraction of memory accesses
in the CXL specification;
• We introduce CXL0, a programming model for coherent
disaggregated memory over CXL;
• We present a transformation that makes linearizable code
durable under the partial crash model and formally prove
its correctness.
To our knowledge, CXL0 is the first programming model
for disaggregated memory over CXL, and our transforma-
tion is the first to equip linearizable code with durability in
the partial crash model. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows. We provide necessary background in §2. In §3,
we describe our system model, abstraction and formalize
the operational semantics that form CXL0. §4 demonstrates
how CXL0 captures current and future CXL setups, and §5
illustrates practical implications on real hardware. In §6, we
show how to transform existing concurrent programs for
CXL0. §7 reviews related work, and §8 concludes this paper.
The conference version of this paper is available in [9],
and the code used for the proofs is available in [8].
2 Background
This section provides the essential background and prelimi-
naries for this work. We include a short introduction to the
relevant parts of the CXL standard based on its specification.
Disaggregated memory. Disaggregated memory is a pro-
visioning approach for improving hardware utilization in
data centers. The idea is to separate compute from memory,
allowing each to scale independently. It is an alternative to
provisioning dedicated servers with enough resources to
handle peak demand which leads to lower utilization during
regular operation. In addition to enabling independent scal-
ing, disaggregated memory also allows independent mainte-
nance and introduces a certain degree of fault tolerance (i.e.,
memory can outlast a compute unit accessing it).
Caching and cache coherence. Memory caching tech-
niques are used to increase efficiency by reducing latency
when accessing memory. This is accomplished by storing
frequently used data in a small, high-speed memory close
to the compute unit, which is much faster than main mem-
ory. Modern processors are equipped with multiple layers
of caches. The presence of caches means that the value of
a logical memory address may reside in multiple physical
locations (i.e., caches and main memory) simultaneously.
Memory caches operate on fixed-size blocks called cache
lines for data transfer.
Cache coherence is a system property that ensures each
load operation observes the outcome of the most recent store
to the same address that reached the cache. Cache-coherent
systems also satisfy single-writer multi-reader exclusion and
concurrent writes are impossible. Many cache coherence
protocols exist, most of which are aimed at single machines
with multiple CPU cores and a hierarchy of shared and pri-
vate caches. Examples include MESI, MOESI, and MESIF, and
some protocols for distributed settings [60, 71].
