The Configuration Wall ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2.1 Configuration in Accelerators
Typically, accelerators operate in macro-operations, i.e., a
large algorithm step is executed as a single instruction. Many
accelerators rely on a configuration-based strategy to enable
a mix of flexibility and performance:
1. Configure accelerator - write configuration registers
2. Launch computation - e.g., write to a launch register
3. Await completion - e.g., poll a status register
While each accelerator’s semantics are different, the pa-
rameters sent to the accelerator during configuration share
many similarities with regular CPU instructions. Acceler-
ators need to specify source and destination, typically ex-
pressed as memory addresses, the location of dedicated regis-
ters, and/or other scalar parameters of the operation that are
to be carried out. However, as macro operations are much
more complex than normal CPU instructions, the number of
parameters is typically much larger, and the number of bits
per parameter much higher than for processor instructions.
Because more configuration bytes have to be conveyed
from the host to the accelerator, more cycles are required to
fully configure an accelerator to perform the desired macro-
operation. This overhead has to be carefully managed, as it
does not contribute to the actual calculation of the macro-
operation that the accelerator was designed for.
As more cycles are typically required to fully configure
an accelerator, getting the configuration mechanism right
is crucial to achieving good accelerator performance. As an
example, assume a fictional accelerator that can process 100
elements per cycle. However, when considering that we need
3 cycles prior to every launch to configure it, we can see that
the accelerator can only achieve an average throughput of
25 elements per cycle in actual workloads.
2.2 Sequential vs. Concurrent Configuration
To minimize the effect of configuration overhead in accelera-
tors, different configuration schemes can be used at the cost
of extra complexity in both hard- and software.
The simplest scheme to configure an accelerator — “se-
quential configuration”, involves the host and accelerator
taking turns to execute the program; the host is stalled af-
ter issuing a launch of the accelerator. Once the accelerator
is finished, the host can configure the accelerator again or
continue normal program execution [13, 19].
In a second scheme — “concurrent configuration”, the host
is not stalled after issuing a launch of the accelerator, but
it can already configure the next accelerator invocation,
and/or continue processing while the accelerator is run-
ning [1, 11, 41]. This gives the programmer the ability to
overlap accelerator computation and configuration through
synchronization barriers. This scheme additionally requires
extra hardware, such as registers that stage new configura-
tions while retaining old ones and other facilities to operate
the barriers, making both hard- and software more complex.
Other configuration mechanisms exist (see Section 8), but
are not discussed in depth in this work.
Understanding the supported scheme of each accelerator
is crucial to determine how large the configuration overhead
is, and what can be done about it in compiler optimizations.
2.3 Data Movement ≠ Configuration Overhead
Macro-operations can usually only be performed after all
input data is in the right memory or register, but we do
not consider such data movement part of the configuration.
Nonetheless, this data movement is crucial: if this transfer
takes a long time, the accelerator’s processing elements are
sitting idle waiting for data. As such, the accelerator will oper-
ate below peak performance, not because it is configuration-
bound, but because it is memory-bound. In Section 4.5, we
explain why this is orthogonal to accelerator configuration.
2.4 Gemmini
To make the previously discussed background concrete, we
discuss Gemmini [19] in detail. Gemmini is a fully open-
source processor architecture with a 64-bit Rocket [5] CPU
and a systolic array to accelerate matrix multiplication. The
systolic array is operated by a controller that is configured
through hardware registers that the rocket CPU writes to us-
ing custom instructions. These custom “RoCC” instructions
can carry more information than a typical RISC-V instruction.
Gemini is sequentially configured: it cannot be reconfigured
by the Rocket host CPU while it is processing.
Gemmini features two types of instruction sequences: fine-
grained ones that spatially unroll the matrix multiplication
on the systolic array, and coarse-grained instructions that
also temporally unroll it. As an example, we show some argu-
ment fields of the coarse-grained gemmini_loop_ws instruc-
tion sequence in Table 1. These fields control various options
for a weight-stationary matrix multiplication C = AB + D:
the addresses and sizes of the individual matrices, selection
of an activation function to be applied on the output, and
whether the input should be accessed in a strided or trans-
posed manner. Since many of the fields are smaller than
typical C word lengths, the CPU has to bit-pack these values,
as shown in Listing 1, an excerpt of Gemmini’s C API. Gem-
mini does not have dedicated launch instructions, instead
the last instruction in the sequence implicitly launches it.
We call this a “launch-semantic” instruction.
The information presented here is crucial to derive the
configuration overhead for Gemmini in Section 4.6.
3 Motivation
In this section, we show why current compilers are unable
to optimize code that interacts with external accelerators
and demonstrate why purpose-built compiler abstractions
are necessary to properly optimize configurations.
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Josse Van Delm et al.
Table 1. Some fields of the gemmini_loop_ws sequence,
which performs a weight-stationary matrix multiplication
C = AB + D, with their meaning and bitwidth
Field Meaning Bits
A, B, D, C Address in main memory to matrices 64
I, J, K Sizes of the matrices 16
pad_{I,J,K} Padding applied to sizes of the matrices 16
stride_{A,B,D,C} Row strides to access matrices in memory 64
act Activation function application on output 6
{A,B}_transpose Whether input matrix is transposed 1
…
ROCC_INST_RS1_RS2(
(pad_K << 32) | (pad_J << 16) | pad_I,
( K << 32) | ( J << 16) | I
) …
slli a4, a4, 16
slli a6, a6, 16
or a4, a4, t1
slli t4, t4, 32
or a6, a6, a5
slli a7, a7, 32
…
or a4, a4, t4
or a6, a6, a7
custom (7b 30 07 13)
…
Final instruction assembly
#def ROCC_INST_RS1_RS2(rs1, rs2)
{
asm volatile(custom "r"rs1, "r"rs2)
}
Configuration source code
Macro expansion
Listing 1. A cleaned up and truncated version of Gemmini’s
accelerator configuration and dispatch code will appear to
the compiler as an opaque series of volatile assembly state-
ments, providing little information in regard to their seman-
tics, therefore preventing any and all compiler optimization.
3.1 Compilers do not Understand Configuration
Most programming languages were never specifically de-
signed for accelerator configuration code - even C, a com-
mon systems language. This makes it difficult to optimize
such configuration code for most compilers.
We identify three main reasons that prevent compilers
from optimizing accelerator configuration code. Firstly, ac-
celerator configuration code is highly specific. The number
and semantics of configuration parameters varies greatly
among accelerators. Furthermore, many accelerators use
custom instructions which typically require inline assem-
bly. However, inline assembly renders emitted instruction
sequences target-specific and mostly opaque to the compiler.
Secondly, configuration has to be performed in the right or-
der. A compiler can not just reorder or omit configuration
sequences, as launching an accelerator before it is configured
may cause faults. This is especially important for accelerators
which are launched implicitly after a certain parameter is
set. Such launch-semantic configuration instructions always
need to be executed last. Thirdly, accelerator configuration
is typically viewed as external register state. Compilers can
track the state of general purpose registers, but not of spe-
cial purpose ones such as accelerator configuration registers.
To inform the compiler that these registers are outside its
control, developers have to use the volatile keyword.
In practice these reasons typically force people to use
volatile inline assembly, which fully prevents the compiler to
optimize any accelerator configuration code. Volatile inline
assembly is indeed target-specific, always emitted, and emit-
ted in the specified order (e.g., in Gemmini’s setup sequence
in Listing 1). This means that optimization to accelerator
configuration code has to happen manually.
3.2 The Promise of Compiler Optimizations
Compiler’s inability to automatically optimize accelerator
configuration sequences does not prevent programmers from
manually optimizing their accelerator invocations. In fact, we
can think of two key optimizations that can be implemented
for most accelerators:
Redundant Setup Elimination which exploits the fact
that configuration registers retain the configured values. If
a configuration register already holds a given value from
a previous setup, the second write to the register can be
safely removed. This trick is most useful when the difference
between repeated accelerator invocations is small, e.g., when
doing tiled computations.
Configuration-Computation Overlap leverages extra
hardware capabilities in concurrent configuration systems
(see Section 2.2). These added capabilities allow the program-
mer to schedule code to run while the accelerator is running,
which can hide most – if not all – of the setup overhead
behind the accelerator’s run-time.
Performing these two optimizations manually is so problem-
and accelerator-specific that they are impractical and there-
fore error-prone. Both optimizations become increasingly
difficult to perform with more complex programs, making a
compiler-based approach highly desirable. However, since
compilers don’t understand configuration, a more potent
abstraction is needed.
In order to understand how these two optimizations im-
pact configuration overhead, and to determine how beneficial
they are, we need an effective model that can explain and
predict observed performance. For this, we introduce the
configuration roofline.
4 The Configuration Roofline Model
In this section, we introduce the novel Configuration Roofline
Model, which we use to estimate the impact of configuration
overhead on overall performance. We start off by remind-
ing the reader about the existing processor roofline model2,
and then introduce our novel extension — the configura-
tion roofline model — for both sequential and concurrently
configured accelerators. We also explore how configuration-
related calculations affect this model. Finally, we conclude
this section by looking into the configuration overhead of
2We specifically refer to this as the “processor roofline model” to distinguish
it from the adapted roofline model we introduce later in the paper.
The Configuration Wall ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
IOperational
(ops/bytes)
I
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
M
e
m
o
r
y
B
a
n
d
w
i
d
t
h
P
(ops/cycle)
Increase Peak Performance
Ppeak
I Operational
×
BW memory
Memory
Bound
Compute
Bound
Figure 3. The processor roofline model, proposed in [44],
can be used to quickly check whether an algorithm with op-
erational intensity 𝐼Operational is compute-bound or memory-
bound on a multi-core processor with peak performance
𝑃Peak and peak memory bandwidth 𝐵𝑊 Memory.
Gemmini and predicting the impact of the optimizations
motivated in Section 3.2.
4.1 Background: Processor Roofline Model
A well-established model for visualizing and assessing per-
formance bottlenecks is the processor roofline model [44]2.
This model allows to see if a workload’s performance on
a specific processor (or accelerator) is memory or compute
bound. Assuming concurrent compute and memory trans-
fers, it uses:
Peak Processor Performance 𝑃Peak
3 is defined as the
number of operations the processor’s (or accelerator’s) dat-
apath supports per unit of time (cycles or seconds) e.g., in
floating point operations per second (FLOPs).
Operational Intensity 𝐼Operational of an algorithm refers
to the number of operations that have to be executed per
byte of data access in ops/byte.
Peak Memory Bandwidth 𝐵𝑊 Memory is defined as the
maximum bandwidth that can practically be sustained for
the memory [44]. Now the maximum attainable performance
𝑃Attainable on a multi-core processor (or parallel accelerator)
with peak performance 𝑃Peak and peak memory bandwidth
𝐵𝑊 Memory for a given algorithm with a certain operational
intensity 𝐼Operational is plotted in Figure 3 and given by:
𝑃Attainable = min
(
𝑃Peak
𝐵𝑊 Memory × 𝐼Operational
(1)
Even though this model was mainly presented to perform
performance analysis on multicore CPU architectures, it has
been successfully extended and applied in many different sys-
tems. Examples include extensions for cache [26], distributed
systems [9], GPUs [16, 31, 34] and TPUs [27].
3Sometimes this is referred to as Peak Floating-point Performance [44], but
some processors (or accelerators) don’t support floating point operations,
so we use the more general term Peak Processor Performance here.
4.2 Concurrent Accelerator Configuration Roofline
Mirroring the classical roofline model, we propose a com-
plementary configuration roofline model. We mainly discuss
this model for the host-controlled accelerators discussed in
Section 2, but just like the classical roofline model we believe
this model can be applied to other systems. For this model
we propose two new metrics:
Operation-to-configuration intensity 𝐼𝑂𝐶 of an algo-
rithm on a certain accelerator is the amount of accelerator
operations that can be executed per byte of configuration in
ops/byte.
Configuration Bandwidth 𝐵𝑊 Config from a host to an
accelerator is the amount of configuration bytes that the host
system can set per unit time (cycles or seconds).
For a system with concurrent configuration capabilities,
slotting in 𝐵𝑊 Config and 𝐼𝑂𝐶 yields the following expression
for attainable performance:
𝑃Attainable, Conc. = min
(
𝑃Peak
𝐵𝑊 Config × 𝐼𝑂𝐶
(2)
We say that performance of an algorithm on a given ac-
celerator system is configuration bound, if in Equation 2 the
minimizing element stems from the configuration-related
term, and compute bound otherwise. We visualize this in
dark red in Figure 4. On this plot, a configuration bound
workload (B) is located under the slanted line of the roofline,
similar to a memory bound workloads in Figure 3.
Workloads in the configuration bound region hit the con-
figuration wall: increasing the accelerator’s peak perfor-
mance does not increase system performance. Here, con-
figuration already takes more time than the accelerator’s
calculation itself, so performance can only be increased if
𝐵𝑊 Config or 𝐼𝑂𝐶 are increased. Increasing 𝐵𝑊 Config moves
the slanted part of the roofline to the left, also moving the
knee point and thus the boundary of the compute bound
region to the left. On the other hand, increasing 𝐼𝑂𝐶 moves
the performance point itself to the right, away from the
configuration bound region.
Figure 4 also shows algorithms in the knee point (C). These
algorithms are configuring the maximal amount of settings
without affecting system performance, as they spend equal
time on configuration and computation.
4.3 Sequential Accelerator Configuration Roofline
The roofline in Equation 2 assumes concurrent configuration,
but not all systems can do that (cfr. Section 2.2). For systems
that can only configure sequentially the total attainable per-
formance has to be computed as the inverse of the attainable
execution time 𝑇Attainable:
𝑃Attainable, Seq. =
1
𝑇Attainable
=
1
1
𝑃Peak
+ 1
𝐵𝑊 Conf.×𝐼𝑂𝐶
(3)
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Josse Van Delm et al.
Concurrent
Roofline
sequential configuration
compute bound
concurrent configuration
knee point
concurrent configuration
configuration bound
A
IOC
(ops/bytes)
I
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
C
o
n
f
i
g
u
r
a
t
i
o
n
B
a
n
d
w
i
d
t
h
A
B
P
(ops/cycle)
Increase Peak Performance
Ppeak
I OC
×
BW config
C
B
C
Time
configure
execute
configure
execute
configure
execute
Config
Bound
Compute
Bound
Sequential
Roofline
Figure 4. We propose the configuration roofline plot, which shows the maximum performance for systems with certain
configuration capabilities. Sequential configuration systems and concurrent configuration systems are bound in performance
by the light red and dark red lines respectively. The knee point in the middle divides the plot in two distinct regions, the
configuration bound on the left and compute bound region on the right. On the left, timeline visualizations for either configuration
capability are given in the configuration bound region (B), knee point (C) and compute bound region (A).
This curve (shown in light red on Figure 4) is not straight
and asymptotically approaches Equation 2, suggesting that
losing performance on configuration cycles is unavoidable
in sequential configuration systems. Here, just pushing the
algorithm to the compute bound region is not enough; per-
formance is dependent on how far the algorithm is from the
knee point (as seen in point A on Figure 4).
Analysis of the difference between Equation 2 and 3 tells
us that the biggest performance discrepancy between concur-
rent and sequential configuration systems is when a system
is operating in the knee point, where the system spends half
of the time configuring the accelerator and half the time
executing a workload.
4.4 Effective Configuration Bandwidth
The models of previous sections allow to calculate the maxi-
mum system performance if all configuration data is known
and available ahead-of-time, but this is often not the case.
Often configuration data is dependent on values that are
only known at runtime, such as loop-carried variables, input-
dependent settings, or settings that store runtime-allocated
pointers to data. This can incur even more configuration
overhead, since the host might be required to perform extra
calculations on those values before it can even start config-
uring the accelerator’s registers. A typical example of this is
the bit-packing of runtime values (also shown in Listing 1).
To take into account extra configuration parameter cal-
culation, we introduce the concept of effective configuration
bandwidth. This can be calculated by not just dividing the
amount of configuration bytes 𝑁config bytes by the time it takes
to set the registers 𝑇set bytes, but also by the time it takes to
calculate the configuration bytes 𝑇calc. bytes for this specific
algorithm as follows:
𝐵𝑊 Config, Eff. =
𝑁config bytes
𝑇calc. bytes +𝑇set bytes
(4)
Using 𝐵𝑊 Config, Eff., the configuration overhead estimation
may be closer to reality, depending on the workload, accel-
erator and CPU host, as we will show in Section 4.6.
4.5 Relationship with the Processor Roofline
The configuration-oriented roofline model we introduce is
complementary to the classical memory-oriented processor
roofline model from [44]. A combined holistic model can be
obtained by combining Equation 1 and Equation 2 or 3.
The maximum attainable performance 𝑃Attainable of a con-
currently configured accelerator with peak performance
𝑃Peak, peak memory bandwidth 𝐵𝑊 Memory and configuration
bandwidth 𝐵𝑊 Config for a given algorithm with operational
intensity 𝐼Operational and operation-to-configuration intensity
𝐼𝑂𝐶 is therefore given by:
𝑃Attainable = min









𝑃Peak
𝐵𝑊 Memory × 𝐼Operational
𝐵𝑊 Config × 𝐼𝑂𝐶
(5)
This equation can be visualized as a 3-dimensional “roofsur-
face” with 𝑃Attainable on the z-, 𝐼𝑂𝐶 on the y-, and 𝐼Operational
on the x-axis respectively, as seen in Figure 5. This figure
demonstrates how an accelerator’s bandwidth and compute
can be perfectly balanced in the processor roofline, while its
ultimate performance can still be bound by configuration in
the configuration roofline.
4.6 Example: Configuration Roofline for Gemmini
As an example, let’s see how Gemmini’s [19] output station-
ary matrix multiplication kernel performs on this roofline
The Configuration Wall ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
P
IOperational
Memory
Bound
IOC
P
Ppeak
I operational
×
BW memory
Compute
Bound
Config-
uration
Bound
IOC
Ppeak
I
O
C
×
B
W
c
o
n
f
i
g
Ppeak
P
IOperational
Figure 5. The processor and configuration roofline can be
combined into a “roofsurface”, that indicates whether an
accelerator’s performance is limited by configuration, peak
memory bandwidth, or peak performance.
model. In our example, this kernel calculates C = AB ∈
R64×64, A ∈ R64×64, B ∈ R64×64 , for a total of 524,288 ops.
Gemmini features a 16-by-16 element systolic array, in
which each processing element can perform one multiply
and one accumulate operation per clock cycle, hence 𝑃Peak =
16 · 16 · 2 = 512 ops/cycle.
To define 𝐵𝑊 Config, we look into the Gemmini hardware:
The custom RoCC instructions of the 64-bit Rocket host [5]
can configure 16 bytes at a time. However, since RISC-V is a
load-store/architecture, it requires at least 2 instructions to
put those 16 bytes into these registers. To convert instruction
counts to cycles we use 3 cycles per instruction for this host
as an approximation4, this yields an estimated configuration
bandwidth of 16
3·3 = BWConfig ≈ 1.77 bytes/cycle.
By inspecting execution traces of the spike simulator [2],
we see that Gemmini requires 160 RoCC instrucions to con-
figure its accelerator. As each instruction sets 16 bytes, we
can calculate the operation-to-configuration intensity as
525,288
160·16 = IOC ≈ 205.19 ops/byte.
Putting these quantities in Equation 3 — Gemmini has
sequential issuing capability — tells us the attainable peak
performance of this algorithm is only running at 41.49%
of peak performance.
The previous calculation does not account for extra loop
and bitwise operations to be performed by the Rocket core
to pack multiple configuration bits together. If we also trace
the instructions for the bit-packing, we see that we need
935 total instructions to configure Gemmini (160 setup +
775 parameter calculation). Again using 3 cycles per instruc-
tion4, we get 160·16
935·3 = BWConfig, Eff. ≈ 0.913 bytes/cycle. If
we use Equation 3 with the effective instead of the theoretical
configuration bandwidth, we see a maximum attainable
utilization of only 26.78%.
This example shows how an accelerator system can hit the
configuration wall, greatly limiting achievable performance
unaccounted for in the traditional processor roofline model.
4The inverse of the harmonic mean of all instruction per cycle scores in [17]
4.7 Applying the Roofline Model
We now have the tools to explore how the two optimizations
introduced in Section 3.2 affect accelerator performance. We
can use the roofline model to predict how observed perfor-
mance will change when each optimization is applied:
Redundant Setup Elimination decreases the number of
configuration parameters of the algorithm without affecting
the actual computation. We thus expect it to increase the
operation-to-configuration intensity 𝐼𝑂𝐶, moving the algo-
rithm to the right of the roofline plot in Figure 4, possibly
out of the configuration-bound regime. Simulataneously, the
reduced time spent configuring will result in an increase in
performance (measured in ops/cycle), moving our measure-
ment up in the plot, closer to peak throughput 𝑃𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘. This op-
timization will be most effective on code in the configuration-
bound region, as it pushes code outside this regime.
Configuration-Computation Overlap neither changes
the number of operations, nor the amount of setup of a
given program. We therefore expect the observed 𝐼𝑂𝐶 to
stay constant, meaning our algorithm will not move along
the horizontal axis. Still, program duration will decrease,
leading to an increase in measured performance, moving our
measurement up in the plot. We expect this increase to be the
highest in the knee-point, and proportional to the difference
between the sequential- and concurrent rooflines (light and
dark red lines in Figure 4), as we are no longer limited by
the sequential model and can make full use of pipelining.
5 Implementation
As we’ve shown, accelerators can hit the configuration wall
which limits achievable performance, but the effect of this
wall can be reduced by applying optimizations to configura-
tion sequences. Current compilers however cannot perform
these optimizations themselves, as they lack a way of ex-
pressing accelerator effects.
We effectively solve this problem by proposing and imple-
menting a compiler abstraction in the form of an Intermediate
Representation (IR) to make the compiler aware of common
accelerator configuration-related code (Section 2.1). We then
use this abstraction to propose and implement rewrites on
this IR to perform the optimizations outlined in Section 3.2
and Section 4.7, and showcased in Figure 7.
5.1 Compiler Abstraction Design
We present an approach based on the compiler framework
MLIR [32] and implemented in xDSL [18], a python test bed
for MLIR abstractions. MLIR provides a lot of supporting
infrastructure and its modular, dialect-based design lends
itself to experimental extensions. MLIR’s concept of a dialect
provides a way to bundle operations into a clearly segmented
namespace, which allows us to develop our solution as an
add-on to existing compiler infrastructure, in turn allowing
us to re-use a lot of the existing infrastructure.
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Josse Van Delm et al.
func.func @matmul(%A, %B, %C) {
%x = memref.dim %A, 0
%y = memref.dim %A, 1
...
%ptrB = memref.extract_pointer %B
%ptrC = memref.extract_pointer %C
%state = accfg.setup "gemm2d" to (
"x" = %x, "y" = %y, "z" = %z,
"A" = %ptrA, "B" = %ptrB, "C" = %ptrC
) : !accfg.state<"gemm2d">
%token = accfg.launch "gemm2d" with %state
: !accfg.state<"gemm2d"> -> !accfg.token<"gemm2d">
accfg.await %token : !accfg.token<"gemm2d">
}
1
2
3
Figure 6. Simplified IR that shows how we capture common
accelerator operations with our accfg dialect, representing
accelerator configuration, launch and await operations. We
highlight the setup state variable in green and the launch
token variable in blue.
Our dialect, called accfg encapsulates the configuration,
launch, await programming model of accelerators:
accfg.setup represents a write to configuration registers
without having any other effects. This produces an
SSA value of type !accfg.state, representing the
state of the accelerators’ configuration file after the
values have been written (Figure 6 (1)).
accfg.launch reads from a state variable and launches
the configuration. The state variable represents (Fig-
ure 6 (2)) the state of the accelerators’ configuration
registers at launch. It can optionally contain launch-
semantic configurations and produces an SSA value of
type token that can be awaited.
accfg.await blocks until the accelerator completes the com-
putation represent by the provided token. It is a no-op
for sequential execution accelerators (Figure 6 (3)).
Since we assume that only operations of the accfg dialect
may modify the accelerator state, an escape hatch may be
needed for stopping optimizations from crossing certain
boundaries. For this, we provide an attribute that can be
added to any non-accfg operation to signal that it destroys
the accelerator state: #accfg.effects<all>.
Conversely, function calls to external functions cannot
be inspected by the compiler, and therefore pose optimiza-
tion barriers. To stop a printf call from disabling all opti-
mizations, we provide another version of this attribute to
signal that state is preserved across a specific operation:
#accfg.effects<none>. A more fine-grained effects inter-
face for foreign operations was not needed for this work.
C
E L A
C L
L
E A
C
E A
E
E E E
A A A
Time
C
E L A
C L A
C L A
E
E
E
Host
Host
E
C
L
Host Execution
Configuration Sequence
Launch
Legend (Host)
A Awaiting Accelerator E
Accelerator
Execution
Legend (Accelerator)
Awaiting
Configuration
A
1
2
3
1
2
3
Accelerator
E E E
A A
Accelerator
Time
C
E L A
L A
L A
E
E
E
Host
1
2
3
E E E
A A
A
Accelerator
Time
C
C
A
Hidden Await Time
Invocation
Original Code
Deduplication (Sec 5.4)
Overlapping (Sec 5.5)
Figure 7. Our optimizations drastically reduce accelerator
idle time by first removing duplicate setups from repeated
configuration invocations (Section 5.4) and then perform
pipelining to overlap host compute and configuration calls
with accelerator execution (Section 5.5).
We place an additional constraint on the IR: only one
state variable may be “live” at any point in time per ac-
celerator: A setup produces a state variable, from which
can be read by launch operations until the next “state” is
produced by the next setup operation. A setup operation
can receive an input state, allowing it to determine a “setup
delta” between itself and the previous state. This represents
the core idea of our abstraction.
This IR intends to capture the semantics of inline-assembly
instructions like the ones used to configure OpenGeMM and
Gemmini. Our model does not address failed configuration
writes or accelerator faults, which is assumed to happen at a
higher level and is thus not part of this work (e.g., system-
level trap handlers). We note that neither OpenGeMM nor
Gemmini have features for tracking such faults.
5.2 Compilation Flow
Adding accfg to the compilation flow requires the introduc-
tion of five additional steps (highlighted as 1 to 5 in Figure 8).
In step 1 the compiler must represent accelerator dispatches
through disjunct setup/launch/await clusters in the IR simi-
lar to Figure 6. In step 2, we establish a connection between
these clusters by connecting the accelerator configuration
state variable of these separate clusters automatically. In
The Configuration Wall ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
OpenGeMM Gemmini
OpenGeMM
RISC-V asm
Gemmini
RISC-V asm
Optimisation
Input IR
Output IR
ACCFG IR
Your Acc
Acc Host
Instructions
1
2
3 4
5
Figure 8. Our dialect design allows it to be inserted into
multiple lowering pipelines. All target architectures must
implement their own translations (steps 1 and 5), but use
the same accfg abstractions, and share a large part of the
available rewrites (steps 2, 3 and 4).
step 3 we optimize the IR by performing redundant store elim-
ination. Step 4 optionally performs setup overlap (can only
be applied for concurrent configuration accelerator systems).
Finally step 5 is needed to convert the accfg operations into
the actual setup sequences for the target architecture.
The dialect conversions (step 1 and 5) needed at the start
and end of our optimization passes represent the only ac-
celerator specific transformations in this pipeline. Every
supported accelerator will need their own set of transla-
tion passes here, but can re-use all other passes provided
in this work. These translations represent simple search-
and-replace operations on the IR, for which MLIR already
provides a powerful interface. We will therefore not go into
further detail on them.
Due to the accfg operations properly defining their effects
instead of being opaque volatile blocks, we immediately
benefit from MLIRs already implemented optimizations for
all major modern CPU architectures such as more aggres-
sive constant folding, common-subexpression-elimination
and loop-invariant-code-motion. This is already effective in
reducing the effective configurational intensity.
The remaining steps (2, 3 and 4) represent the core ideas
presented in this paper, and are outlined below.
5.3 State Tracing
Reasoning about sequences of setup operations requires us to
establish an order of invocations. We do this by introducing
a state-variable for each accelerator. With this, we can model
read/write effects of the accelerators’ configuration registers
with the tools provided within MLIR. This is inspired by the
concept of memory SSA [36], which encodes clobbering and
alias analysis directly into the def-use chain.
We inspect for each setup operation whether we can
determine the previous live state variable through static
analysis of control flow. The IR is then rewritten to connect
these states by adding the prior state as an input to the setup
operation. Our implementation does this for straight-line
code, if/else branches, and for-loops, making pessimistic
assumptions about invisible code (such as function calls).
We ensure correctness by assuming all unknown oper-
ations and function calls could read/write the state unless
annotated with an #accfg.effects<none> attribute.
5.4 Configuration Deduplication
We now have all the necessary information expressed in
the IR needed to perform configuration deduplication. Due
to the form of state-traced IR, we are able to infer which
register holds which value.
We can now visit every setup operation and inspect the
operation that produced the prior input state, to construct the
state of the accelerators’ configuration registers. On a high
level, it walks the use-def chain backwards to discover all
setup operations that could have clobbered the configuration
and constructs a map of known fields and their values.
We use this information to then remove setup instructions
that represent a redundant write of a value to a setup field,
i.e. a write of the same value to the same location. We check
for SSA-Value equivalence as a proxy for value-equivalence.
Due to the properties of SSA, we don’t actually need to infer
the runtime-value at compile time, and instead rely on the
fact that SSA values can’t be re-assigned during the course
of a program, meaning that the same SSA-value will always
contain the same value at runtime.
MLIR’s powerful common sub-expression elimination,
loop-invariant code motion (LICM) and canonicalization
passes go through great lengths to ensure that SSA variables
referencing the same value are deduplicated. Therefore, we
are able to leverage SSA-level equivalence to perform dedu-
plication. Even though these optimizations are also applied in
regular compilers, they can never perform them on external
register state, something our compiler explicitly enables.
5.4.1 Optimizing through Control Flow. To increase
the potency of the configuration deduplication, we perform
two additional rewrites right before attempting deduplica-
tion: Lifting setup calls into branching logic, and lifting loop-
invariant setup fields out of loops. Hoisting into branches
is motivated by the fact that our inference has to take the
intersection of the two sides of the branch when the control
flow forks, removing possible optimization potential as we
can’t know after the branch which path was executed. By
hoisting the setup into the branch, we re-gain a linear chain
of setup calls creating more opportunities for deduplication.
Our loop-hoisting logic closely follows MLIRs existing
LICM pass, with the additional constraint that we can only
hoist parameters that stay constant throughout the whole
loop body (e.g. if there are two consecutive launches with
different parameters inside the loop, we can’t hoist them
even though they are technically loop-invariant). The pass
inspects each setup parameter separately to discern if it is
loop-dependent or not, and moves it to a newly created setup
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Josse Van Delm et al.
%state = accfg.setup to ()
scf.for (%i = 0..10) iter_args(%state) {
%inner_state = accfg.setup from %state to (
"A" = %ptrA,
"i" = %i
)
%token = accfg.launch with %inner_state
accfg.await %token
scf.yield %inner_state
}
%state = accfg.setup to ("A" = %ptrA, "i" = 0)
scf.for (%i = 0..10) iter_args(%state) {
%token = accfg.launch with %state
%i_next = arith.add %i 1
%inner_state = accfg.setup from %state to (
"i" = %i_next
)
accfg.await %token
scf.yield %inner_state
}
%state = accfg.setup to ("A" = %ptrA)
scf.for (%i = 0..10) iter_args(%state) {
%inner_state = accfg.setup from %state to (
"i" = %i
)
%token = accfg.launch with %inner_state
accfg.await %token
scf.yield %inner_state
}
Figure 9. Visualization of our loop-level optimizations on simplified IR, showing loop-invariant code motion (blue) in the first
transition and overlap (gray-green) in the second. Types and accelerator names have been omitted.
operation right in front of the loop if it is determined that
the value can be moved safely (See second block of Figure 9
and Figure 7). After these two rewrites are performed, we
run two more clean-up passes that remove empty setup op-
erations, and merge setup operations which have no launch
statements in between.
This optimization pass ultimately leaves us with a func-
tionally equivalent program that needs to spend much less
time on configuring registers.
5.5 Configuration Overlap
In order to fully exploit the concurrency in many modern ac-
celerator setups, we also implement the second optimization
that schedules code to run concurrently with the accelerator.
We do this by pushing suitable code up before the previous
await statement. While this optimization is relatively easy
to implement for straight-line code, overlapping setup and
computation inside loops is difficult, as a setup sequence
must happen before the accelerator is launched.
As part of this optimization, we implement a form of
software-pipelining that allows us to transform looping code
into IR suitable for overlapping configuration and compu-
tation. This is done by identifying suitable setup sequences
(more on this further down in this section), and pushing
them “up” one loop iteration. This is done in two steps:
1. First we insert a copy of the setup operation before
the loop starts, replacing all uses of the loop counter
with the lower bound for the loop.
2. Then we change the setup sequence inside the loop
to use an incremented loop counter, making sure to
leave other uses of the loop counter unaffected.
As stated earlier, not all setup sequences can be rearranged
like this. Our setup sequence identification algorithm checks
whether all operations are pure, meaning that no read-before-
write errors are introduced when they are moved around. If
the setup sequence contains impure operations that cannot
be moved safely, a partial move of the setup operation could
still be performed, although this is not implemented in our
current infrastructure.
After the loops have been rewritten to a suitable form
for overlapping, a relatively simple block-level rewrite pat-
tern can overlap configuration and accelerator execution on
straight-line code by looking for a setup operation with an
input state that is launched and awaited earlier inside the
same block. If we are able to identify such a setup, we move
it up and in front of the identified await operation5. This is
shown in the third block of Figure 9 and Figure 7.
6 Evaluation
To evaluate our proposed abstraction and optimization passes,
we demonstrate in this section how much we can reduce
the configuration overhead and increase performance of
tiled matrix multiplication benchmarks. We consider two
targets, Gemmini [19], which is a sequential-configuration
architecture (so configuration-overlap is not possible) and
OpenGeMM [47] which is a concurrent-configuration archi-
tecture. While these platforms are both optimized for matrix
multiplications, their host CPU and software stacks are very
different — this section sets out to show that accfg is gen-
eral enough to be leveraged for a variety of architectures. In
addition to these case studies, we will look at how the perfor-
mance results fit within our roofline model (Section 6.2.1).
6.1 Tiled Matrix Multiplication on Gemmini
In order to approximate the configuration overhead on Gem-
mini [19], we implement accfg lowerings to run Gemmini’s
bare-metal weight-stationary tiled matrix multiply experi-
ments on various matrix sizes in the instruction-accurate
spike simulator [2]. We trace the number of configuration
bytes and setup and calculation instructions with Rocket’s
performance counters in spike to calculate 𝐵𝑊 Config, Eff., and
𝐼𝑂𝐶. We use 𝑃Peak = 512 ops/cycle and an average of 3 cycles
per instruction, extracted from [17] for the Rocket core and
use Equation 3 as a proxy for the attainable performance.
As a baseline we use Gemmini’s experiments in C code,
compiled with GCC 13.2.0 and optimization level -O2, which
is the optimization level used in their experiments’ repository.
5We move the entire setup sequence, consisting of both the setup and pure
(non-effecting) operations that calculate its inputs.
The Configuration Wall ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
32 64 128 256 512
Square Matrix Multiplication size
0
128
256
384
512
𝑃
𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
(ops/cycle)
137
379
419
482
500
171
406
482
506 511
C Gemmini
accfg (ours)
𝑃𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑘 (512 ops/cycle)
Figure 10. The attainable performance of Gemmini’s weight-
stationary matrix multiplication mode on various matrix
sizes shows that accfg enables an overall geomean perfor-
mance uplift of 11%.
For our optimized binaries we progressively lower a matrix
multiplication in MLIR using accfg to LLVM IR with LLVM
inline assembly for the RoCC instructions. The resulting
LLVM IR is compiled by clang with -O2 and –target=
generic-riscv64, and linked to an adapted C main file with
GCC, using the same settings as the baseline. The resulting
attainable performance is shown in Figure 10, where we see
a geomean performance improvement of 11%.
The experimental results show an uplift in Gemmini’s per-
formance. Gemmini’s weight-stationary kernel does not have
a lot of room for improvement: it sets up a lot less parameters
than its output-stationary counterpart, and does not allow for
configuration-computation overlap. Nonetheless we still see
performance improvements due to better constant folding
and loop unrolling. Our accfg dialect enables these improve-
ments because it provides more accurate semantics to the
compiler than volatile assembly statements. In Gemmini’s
output stationary flow (which we do not evaluate here), we
would expect to see larger performance improvements.
Our optimizations appear to have the biggest impact at
a size of 128. Smaller sizes only require a single invocation,
preventing us from benefiting from deduplication, while
larger sizes are heavily compute bound, negating any bene-
fits gained from deduplication. Still, at a size of 128 we see
a speed-up of ≈ 15% over the baseline produced by GCC.
Overall, we see performance improvements averaging 11%.
6.2 Tiled Matrix Multiplication on OpenGeMM
We also run our matrices on OpenGeMM [47], a concur-
rent configuration matrix multiplication accelerator system
with peak performance of 1024 ops/cycle and a tiny in-order
RISC-V core [48]. We run tiled matrix multiplications of
K-by-K squared matrices, using a tile size of 8-by-K-by-8.
inside a cycle-accurate model through Verilator. To properly
16 32 64 128 256 512
Square Matrix Multiplication Size
0
128
256
384
512
640
768
896
𝑃
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑
(ops/cycle)
×1.86
×2.71
×2.71
×2.05
×1.63
×1.35
Base (MLIR)
With Optimizations
Figure 11. The performance of matrix multiplications on
OpenGeMM [47] with various matrix sizes. We can see that
the optimizations that accfg enables unlock significant extra
performance, with a geomean of improvement of 2x.
102 103
𝐼𝑂𝐶 (ops/byte)
103
2 × 102
3 × 102
4 × 102
6 × 102
𝑃
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑
(ops/cycle)
Size
64
128
256
Optimization
Base (MLIR)
Deduplicated
Overlapped
All
Rooflines
Concurrent
Sequential
1
Just Deduplication
Overlap
2
3
All
Figure 12. Plotting our measurements together with both
the sequential (red) and concurrent configuration (black)
rooflines of OpenGeMM [47] shows the power of our opti-
mizations and model. Our overlap optimization lifts the peak
performance of the accelerator. Our deduplication optimiza-
tion increases 𝐼𝑂𝐶 and lifts peak performance
gauge the configuration overhead, we only measure the per-
formance of the tiling loop itself and turn off all memory
copies between internal scratchpads. All binaries are com-
piled with our accfg-based MLIR flow, but the base results
do not perform any configuration deduplication or config-
uration overlap. Figure 11 shows the comparison of these
results. Our optimizations help us achieve a significant ge-
omean speed-up of 2x.
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Josse Van Delm et al.
6.2.1 Comparing Results with Roofline Model. We
also plot our results for OpenGeMM into its roofline chart
in Figure 12. We can compare the impact of individual opti-
mizations against the intuition developed in Section 4.7. As
outlined in that section, we can see that removing redundant
setups (deduplication), moves the measurement point up and
to the right in the plot (arrow 1), signifying an increase in
throughput and a reduction of configuration overhead. For
size 128, we can clearly see that performing the optimization
moves the algorithm out of the configuration-bound regime.
Introducing overlap moves the measurement point up
as predicted (arrow 2), and the distance moved correlates
directly with the difference between the sequential- and
concurrent rooflines. Performing both deduplication and
overlapping yields the biggest speed-ups (arrow 3).
In general, we can conclude that our optimizations effec-
tively enable moving accelerators away from the configura-
tion bound region towards the compute bound region.
