AGS: Accelerating 3D Gaussian Splatting SLAM via
CODEC-Assisted Frame Covisibility Detection
Houshu He
School of Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China
h_houshu@sjtu.edu.cn
Naifeng Jing
Department of Micro-Nano
Electronics, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China
sjtuj@sjtu.edu.cn
Li Jiang
School of Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China
ljiang_cs@sjtu.edu.cn
Xiaoyao Liang
School of Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China
liang-xy@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Zhuoran Song∗
School of Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China
songzhuoran@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a critical
task that enables autonomous vehicles to construct maps and
localize themselves in unknown environments. Recent break-
throughs combine SLAM with 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
to achieve exceptional reconstruction fidelity. However, ex-
isting 3DGS-SLAM systems provide insufficient throughput
due to the need for multiple training iterations per frame
and the vast number of Gaussians.
In this paper, we propose AGS, an algorithm-hardware
co-design framework to boost the efficiency of 3DGS-SLAM
based on the intuition that SLAM systems process frames
in a streaming manner, where adjacent frames exhibit high
similarity that can be utilized for acceleration. On the soft-
ware level: 1) We propose a coarse-then-fine-grained pose
tracking method with respect to the robot’s movement. 2)
We avoid redundant computations of Gaussians by sharing
their contribution information across frames. On the hard-
ware level, we propose a frame covisibility detection engine
to extract intermediate data from the video CODEC. We also
implement a pose tracking engine and a mapping engine
with workload schedulers to efficiently deploy the AGS algo-
rithm. Our evaluation shows that AGS achieves up to 17.12×,
∗Zhuoran Song is the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2165-6/2026/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3760250.3762229
6.71×, and 5.41× speedups against the mobile and high-end
GPUs, and a state-of-the-art 3DGS accelerator, GSCore.
Keywords: 3DGS, SLAM, CODEC, Frame covisibility
ACM Reference Format:
Houshu He, Naifeng Jing, Li Jiang, Xiaoyao Liang, and Zhuoran
Song. 2026. AGS: Accelerating 3D Gaussian Splatting SLAM via
CODEC-Assisted Frame Covisibility Detection. In Proceedings of
the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS
’26), March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3760250.3762229
1 Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a piv-
otal task in computer vision, allowing autonomous systems
such as robots to perceive and interact with the environ-
ment. The main objective of SLAM includes tracking and
mapping that enable a robot to determine its own location
and construct a map of the surroundings in an unknown
environment. While both traditional [17, 31, 32, 43, 44] and
deep learning-based SLAM systems [4, 24, 41] struggle to
capture fine details in 3D scenes, radiance field-based meth-
ods [3, 20, 25, 29, 30], represented by 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [20], have demonstrated outstanding capabilities in
reconstructing high-fidelity scenes, and are recently adopted
in state-of-the-art SLAM systems [28, 39, 46, 49, 55]. Ta-
ble 1 compares the 3DGS-SLAM with Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF)-based SLAM [29, 49, 55] and traditional SLAM [32,
43]. While traditional SLAM algorithms deliver high track-
ing accuracy, they struggle to provide satisfying mapping
results. In contrast, 3DGS-SLAM stands out for its sufficient
tracking accuracy and superior mapping quality.
However, the exceptional scene representation capability
of 3DGS-SLAM is achieved at the cost of deploying numer-
ous Gaussians and multiple training iterations per frame.
Specifically, conducting a representative 3DGS-SLAM algo-
rithm, SplaTAM [19], for less than 600 frames on an Nvidia
arXiv:2509.00433v1
[cs.AR]
30
Aug
2025
ASPLOS ’26, March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Houshu He, Naifeng Jing, Li Jiang, Xiaoyao Liang, and Zhuoran Song
Table 1. Comparison of 3DGS-SLAM with existing SLAM
algorithms. Green boxes highlight higher performance and
red boxes indicate weaker performance.
Category Algorithm
Tracking Accuracy
ATE(cm)
Mapping Accuracy
PSNR(dB)
Speed Performance
Latency (s/frame)
SplatAM (2024) [19] High(≥ 3.0) High(≥ 30) High(≥ 2.0)
GS-SLAM (2024) [46] High(≥ 3.0) High(≥ 30) High(≥ 0.5)
3DGS-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM (2023) [51] High(≥ 3.0) High(≥ 30) High(≥ 2.0)
VoxFusion (2022) [49] High(≥ 3.0) Low(≤ 25) High(≥ 0.4)
Nerf-SLAM
Nice-SLAM (2022) [55] High(≥ 4.0) Low(≤ 25) Low(≤ 0.2)
Droid-SLAM (2021) [42] Low(≤ 2.0) Low(≤ 20) Low(≤ 0.2)
Trad-SLAM
Orb-SLAM2 (2017) [32] Low(≤ 2.0) Low(≤ 20) Low(≤ 0.2)
A100 GPU takes more than 20 minutes, demonstrating insuf-
ficient performance that limits its applications. For instance,
autonomous robots can leverage a 3DGS-SLAM to support
construction automation [48], such as transporting build-
ing materials. The expectation is that the robots will com-
plete scene modeling (training) within minutes and begin
delivering promptly; otherwise, delays could lead to reduced
productivity. Unfortunately, due to inadequate training per-
formance, 3DGS-SLAM can still only learn environmental
information slowly, highlighting the need for acceleration.
While previous efforts, such as GSCore [22] and Cicero [12],
successfully attains rapid inference speed for 3DGS or NeRF,
they neglect to enhance the efficiency of the training process
and lacks further investigation into streaming systems such
as SLAM, thereby cannot achieve optimal performance.
In this paper, we begin by profiling 3DGS-SLAM and come
to the recognition of three core performance bottlenecks.
First, tracking utilizes numerous training iterations of 3DGS
to estimate camera poses, leading to low throughput. Second,
mapping overlooks the different contributions of Gaussians
and leads to redundant computations. Specifically, a large
portion of Gaussians do not contribute to scene represen-
tation but still consume substantial workloads. Lastly, we
observe unbalanced workloads exist in both tracking and
mapping, leading to severe hardware under-utilization.
To address these limitations, we propose AGS, an algorithm-
architecture co-design framework to accelerate 3DGS-SLAM
based on one key insight that SLAM systems process each
incoming frame in a streaming manner, and consecu-
tive frames exhibit high similarity that provides infor-
mation for acceleration. From the software aspect, AGS
proposes a two-level approach to optimize both the tracking
and mapping tasks. 1) During tracking, we observe that the
covisibility between frames (abbreviated as FC) indicates
the magnitude of the robot’s movement, leading to varying
difficulty of pose estimation across frames. This motivates
us to reduce redundant training iterations spent on frames
with high covisibility. Specifically, as elaborated in Fig. 1
(a), a high FC implies minor movements where the pose
of the current frame is easy to estimate from the previous
frame, while a low FC indicates significant positional or per-
spective shifts, making pose estimation more challenging.
(a) Tracking
(b) Mapping
High Covisibility: Easy to Estimate Pose
Current Frame
Previous
Frame
High Covisibility: Same Non-
Contributive Gaussians
Previous Frame
Current Frame
Low Covisibility: Different Non-
Contributive Gaussians
Previous Frame
Current Frame
Low Covisibility: Hard to Estimate Pose
Current Frame
Trajactory
Previous
Frame
Skip!
Figure 1. Overview of AGS.
Therefore, we adopt a lightweight algorithm to generate
coarse estimations of pose for frames with high covisibility.
For frames with low covisibility, the estimation is followed
by fewer training iterations of 3DGS to fine-tune the pose. 2)
During mapping, we observe that frame covisibility also indi-
cates the similarity of Gaussian contribution information. As
shown in Fig. 1 (b), a high FC implies that non-contributory
Gaussians in the previous frame are more likely to remain
non-contributory in the current frame. Thus, we can lever-
age the information from the previous frame to help identify
and skip computations of non-contributory Gaussians for
the current frame. In doing so, we designate key frames and
non-key frames based on frame covisibility. For key frames,
we perform full mapping and record the non-contributory
Gaussians. For non-key frames, we utilize the recorded in-
formation to predict and skip redundant computations.
From the hardware aspect, we introduce a customized AGS
architecture to support the AGS algorithm. To efficiently cap-
ture frame covisibility, we take a deep look into the System-
on-Chip (SoC) in edge devices running SLAM and discover
an hardware IP: the video CODEC, which is originally used to
exploit covisibility across images for video compression [40].
This observation inspired us to repurpose the intermediate
results from the CODEC to define frame covisibility with-
out adding significant hardware overhead. Moreover, we
propose to disassemble the rendering pipeline of 3DGS and
design dedicated hardware units to allow redistribution of
the unbalanced workloads for tracking and mapping.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows:
• We present AGS, the first algorithm-architecture co-
design framework to accelerate 3DGS-SLAM.
• On the software level, we propose movement-adaptive
tracking and Gaussian contribution-aware mapping
to accelerate both tracking and mapping tasks based
on different levels of frame covisibility.
