[1-2) [2-4) [4-8) [8-16) [16-32) [32+)
Length of the identical token sequence
0
20
40
60
Percentage
(%)
Count %
Length %
Figure 8. Distribution of speculative hit lengths.
230K dataset and 16K max response length, the host memory
overhead of suffix trees is < 80GB per node with 8 nodes.
HistoSpec also supports compression and swapping to SSD
for memory saving, and checkpoint for fault tolerance.
5.4 AIMD-like Token Speculation
To determine the length of tokens predicted by HistoSpec in
each iteration, we conduct a detailed analysis of the length
distribution of identical token sequences in rollout responses.
As shown in Fig.8, short segments (1-2 tokens) dominate
in quantity, while long segments account for the majority
in the total length. This poses a challenge for HistoSpec: If
we predict many tokens per iteration, most tokens would
be rejected, wasting significant computation on verifying
them. If we predict a small number of tokens, computational
resources cannot be fully utilized, undermining speculative
decoding’s advantage in improving computational density.
We find that network congestion control encounters simi-
lar challenges. Classical TCP congestion control employs the
AIMD (Additive Increase, Multiplicative Decrease [21]) princi-
ple: gradually increasing the window size when network is
uncongested, but aggressively reducing it upon congestion.
Inspired by AIMD, HistoSpec designs a dynamic speculation
window for each response, initialized to two tokens. When
all speculated tokens are accepted, HistoSpec additively in-
creases the window size by 2, until it meets the upper thresh-
old (32 by default). But when any token is rejected, it resets
the size directly to 2. This approach guarantees high compu-
tational density during generating long matching sequences,
and minimal wasted computation for short sequences.
As for the prefix length, HistoSpec sets it to 7 initially. If
no matching suffix is found, HistoSpec progressively reduces
it until it reaches 3. These hyperparameters are adjustable.
HistoSpec also considers batch size. At large batch sizes,
increased decoding parallelism yields higher GPU computa-
tional utilization, where excessively low speculative accep-
tance rates degrades the overall throughput. To mitigate this,
HistoSpec monitors the acceptance rates and adaptively dis-
ables speculation. Through pre-profiling, HistoSpec gets the
maximum viable batch size for throughput gains at different
acceptance rates. When a rollout worker’s current batch size
exceeds the threshold, speculation is automatically disabled
to preserve system efficiency.
2 6 10 14 18
Step
0
25
50
75
100
Percentage
(%)
Math1
Math2
Math3
Code1
Code2
Figure 9. The ranking group changes of responses across 20
epochs. Since RL algorithms like GRPO generate multiple responses
for each prompt, we analyze the previous epoch by assigning all
responses of each prompt to the same ranking group based on their
median length, yielding the predicted group. For the current epoch,
we sort all responses by their actual lengths to assign groups, obtaining
the real group, and compare it with the predicted group to collect the
data. In the figure, the lower parts of the bars represent the proportion
of responses that remain in the same or a lower group; the upper parts
represent the proportion of responses that, despite changing groups,
only move up one group and have lengths in the shorter 50% of the
new group (i.e., shift near the group boundary).
6 HistoPipe: Hybrid Rollout Pipeline
Although HistoSpec improves rollout efficiency, it does not
address the issue of imbalanced rollout distributions, result-
ing in non-trivial GPU resource underutilization. We observe
that leveraging the information from historical rollouts can
effectively maintain load balance throughout the rollout pro-
cess, and propose the HistoPipe scheduling design.
6.1 Observation: Distribution Similarity in Rollout
Although different prompts generate varying numbers of
tokens within a single rollout, we observe that the response
length (i.e., token count) distribution for the same prompt
across adjacent epochs remains similar. In other words, if a
prompt generates a relatively large number of tokens in one
rollout iteration, it is likely to produce a similarly large token
count in subsequent rollouts. Therefore, we can effectively
predict the ranking of response lengths using historical lengths.
To validate this observation, we analyze the response
length rankings across multiple rollout epochs for five datasets
(Fig.6c). Specifically, we group the responses into 8 ranking
groups based on their lengths, ranked from low to high. As
Fig.9 shows, across 20 epochs (300—1000 steps), for math
tasks, an average of only 16% of responses change their group
to higher ones (28% for code tasks). Among them, 13% of the
(all) responses only shift near the group boundary without
significantly altering the distribution (24% for code). These
results demonstrate that not only do generated tokens ex-
hibit similarity across rollouts, but the distribution of rollout
lengths also remains relatively consistent over epochs.
6.2 Distribution-aware Hybrid Pipeline
Leveraging the similarity in rollout length distributions can
enable more balanced scheduling of rollout tasks, reducing
7
