2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Epoch
0
20
40
60
80
100
Acc.
Rate
(%)
Math-1
Math-2
Math-3
Code-1
Code-2
(a) Acceptance rate across epochs
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Acceptance Rate
0%
5%
10%
Percentage
Math-1
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Acceptance Rate
0%
2%
4%
6% Code-1
(b) Responses’ acceptance rate distribution (Math-1 and Code-1)
Dataset Size
Math-1 230K
Math-2 40K
Math-3 10K
Code-1 40K
Code-2 12K
(c) Datasets used
Figure 6. Characterizing historical token similarity. We use five datasets to train 14B LLMs respectively using the GRPO algorithm.
dra chosen
“so”
261
“the”
“value is”
“2”
0.6
1.3
-0.6
-0.6
1.9
1.3
Prefix
…
1.3
… …
“1”
leaf
Priority:
response’s reward
R
…
…
token/tokens
…
Figure 7. Suffix-tree based draft generation. R = Root. For ease
of understanding, we convert token ids into words.
be successfully “accept” using this routine (on average, 75%
for code). Furthermore, as training progresses (i.e., with in-
creasing epochs), the similarity increases. Fig.6b shows the
distribution of the responses’ acceptance rates.
5.2 Speculative Rollout with History
Leveraging historical token similarity, we design HistoSpec,
which utilizes speculative decoding to accelerate rollouts and
uses historical responses as draft sources. In each decoding
iteration, HistoSpec uses the last few generated tokens as the
prefix to search for matches within the prompt’s historical
responses. Upon matching, it extracts a certain number of
subsequent tokens following the prefix as drafts. The drafts
are then verified via a single LLM forward pass, with some
(possibly all) tokens accepted (§2.2). This history-based spec-
ulative rollout improves computational resource utilization
during rollouts, and reduces the time of the rollout stage.
Technical challenges. However, this approach encounters
two challenges: (1) Over-long rollout sequences induce sig-
nificant prefix matching overhead, and the branching in
historical responses complicates draft token selection; (2)
Unpredictable draft acceptance length creates a trade-off
between underutilizing compute capacity (when predicting
too few tokens) and wasting resources on verifying rejected
tokens (when over-predicting).
5.3 Tree-based Historical Rollout Management
Draft generation overhead is a pivotal factor determining
speculative decoding’s effectiveness. However, existing corpus-
based speculation methods face a dilemma between retrieval
costs and index building costs. E.g., n-gram [36, 50] requires
time-consuming linear scans for prefix matching, and Suf-
fixDecoding [35] limits the lengths of draft source sequences
to reduce index building costs. During LLM RL, each epoch
generates multiple long responses (totaling hundreds of thou-
sands of tokens per prompt). Traditional draft generation
methods struggle to operate efficiently under the constraints.
Async cache building. The RL workloads allow us to relax
the constraints on draft generation. In RL sampling strategies,
the same request is generally not re-sampled until multiple
steps later. Therefore, we are able to shift the computational
overhead associated with retrieval to the indexing phase.
RhymeRL employs history workers to index historical rollout
sequences asynchronously. Upon generating new responses,
the controller dispatches them to history workers for index
construction. When scheduling prompts to rollout workers
(asynchronously), the controller notifies the corresponding
history workers to transfer the relevant indexed cache.
Reward-aware tree-based management. RhymeRL em-
ploys suffix trees [51] to index cached responses, which en-
ables 𝑂(𝑚)-time matching for length-𝑚 prefixes. RhymeRL
maintains a dedicated tree for each prompt, indexing all its
historical responses generated in its last rollout. Since mod-
ern RL algorithms generate multiple responses per prompt
to explore multiple solution paths, a prefix may branch to
divergent suffixes, complicating draft token selection. We ob-
serve that, during training, RL algorithms optimize the model
towards generating high-reward solutions with higher prob-
ability. Therefore, we add a priority value to each tree node,
weighted by the sum of the rewards of its branch. For every
suffix branch present, HistoSpec selects the one with the
highest priority. Through this RL-algorithm-guided design,
HistoSpec maximizes the speculation acceptance rate.
As Fig.7 shows, in the suffix tree, each node represents
a subsequence formed by the path from root to that node,
where each leaf node corresponds to a complete suffix of
a response, and each edge represents one or more tokens
extending the sequence of parent node to the sequence of the
child. For each leaf node, its priority (marked on the nodes
in Fig.7) is the sum of the rewards for the responses that
end with this suffix (that the leaf node represents). A parent
node’s priority is the sum of its children’s priorities.
Resources. Both the tree’s construction time overhead and
memory overhead are 𝑂(𝑛) for 𝑛 tokens [52]. GPU clusters
have sufficient CPU resources (64–128+ cores and multi-
TB host memory), which are mostly idle during previous
RL flows. RhymeRL strictly limits the resources used by
history workers using OS methods [53], preventing them
from interfering with other workers. For RL training with a
6
