Hardwired-Neurons Language Processing Units as General-Purpose
Cognitive Substrates
YANG LIU12*, YI CHEN13*, YONGWEI ZHAO1, YIFAN HAO1, ZIFU ZHENG12, WEIHAO KONG12, ZHANG-
MAI LI13, DONGCHEN JIANG12, RUIYANG XIA12, ZHIHONG MA12, ZISHENG LIU12, ZHAOYONG
WAN13, YUNQI LU12, XIMING LIU12, HONGRUI GUO12, ZHIHAO YANG42, ZHE WANG12, TIANRUI
MA1, MO ZOU1, RUI ZHANG1, LING LI4, XING HU1, ZIDONG DU1, ZHIWEI XU1, QI GUO1†, TIANSHI
CHEN5, and YUNJI CHEN12, 1State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China, 2University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, 3University of Science and Technology of China, China, 4Institute of Software, CAS,
China, and 5Cambricon Technologies, China
The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has established
language as a core general-purpose cognitive substrate, driving the demand
for specialized Language Processing Units (LPUs) tailored for LLM infer-
ence. To overcome the growing energy consumption of LLM inference sys-
tems, this paper proposes a Hardwired-Neurons Language Processing Unit
(HNLPU), which physically hardwires LLM weight parameters into the
computational fabric, achieving several orders of magnitude computational
efficiency improvement by extreme specialization. However, a significant
challenge still lies in the scale of modern LLMs. A straightforward hard-
wiring of gpt-oss 120 B would require fabricating photomask sets valued at
over 6 billion dollars, rendering this straightforward solution economically
impractical.
Addressing this challenge, we propose the novel Metal-Embedding method-
ology. Instead of embedding weights in a 2D grid of silicon device cells,
Metal-Embedding embeds weight parameters into the 3D topology of metal
wires. This brings two benefits: (1) a 15× increase in density, and (2) 60
out of 70 photomask layers are homogeneous across chips, including all
EUV photomasks. In total, Metal-Embedding reduced the photomask cost by
112×, bringing the Non-Recurring Engineering (NRE) cost of HNLPU into an
economically viable range. Experimental results show that HNLPU achieved
249,960 tokens/s (5,555×/85× that of GPU/WSE), 36 tokens/J (1,047×/283×
that of GPU/WSE), 13,232 mm2 total die area, $ 59.46 M–123.5 M estimated
NRE at 5 nm technology. Analysis shows that HNLPU achieved 41.7–80.4×
improvement in cost-effectiveness and 357× reduction in carbon footprint
compared to OpenAI-scale H100 clusters, under an annual weight updating
assumption.
1 Introduction
Current trends in artificial intelligence development indicate that
language capabilities serve as the core foundation for constructing
advanced cognitive and learning systems. This is exemplified by the
rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs), which have
†Corresponding Author: Qi Guo
*Contribute Equally.
Authors’ Contact Information: Yang Liu12*; Yi Chen13*; Yongwei Zhao1; Yifan Hao1;
Zifu Zheng12; Weihao Kong12; Zhangmai Li13; Dongchen Jiang12; Ruiyang Xia12;
Zhihong Ma12; Zisheng Liu12; Zhaoyong Wan13; Yunqi Lu12; Ximing Liu12; Hongrui
Guo12; Zhihao Yang42; Zhe Wang12; Tianrui Ma1; Mo Zou1; Rui Zhang1; Ling Li4; Xing
Hu1; Zidong Du1; Zhiwei Xu1; Qi Guo1†; Tianshi Chen5; Yunji Chen12, 1State Key
Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China and 2University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and 3University of Science and Technology
of China, China and 4Institute of Software, CAS, China and 5Cambricon Tech-
nologies, China, {liuyang22z1,zhaoyongwei,haoyifan,zhengzifu24s,kongweihao21b,
jiangdongchen23s,xiaruiyang,mazhihong24z,liuzisheng24s,luyunqi24s,liuximing22z,
guohongrui21b,wangzhe24s,matianrui,zoumo,zhangrui,huxing,duzidong,zxu,guoqi,
cyj}@ict.ac.cn,{chen_yi,lizhangmai,wanzhy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{yangzhihao2021,
liling}@iscas.ac.cn,tchen@cambricon.com.
Life, Science, and Art
Ask Me Anything: _
Life, Science, and Art
Ask Me Anything: _
0.03 Tokens/J 36 Tokens/J
Fig. 1. Hardwired LPU as a general-purpose processor. To the left: AI
Infrastructures are originated in the rapidly evolving deep learning which
appreciates universality over extreme efficiency. To the right: As LLM devel-
ops, the responsibilities of universality are shifting from HW/SW to LLMs.
An extremely specialized Hardwired LPU can also be helpful in general
tasks.
achieved technological unification in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) [5, 79, 83]. By demonstrating human-level performance across
diverse downstream tasks, LLMs are expanding their application
scope while exhibiting a growing trend toward enhanced generality—
enabling a single model to handle multiple tasks that previously
required distinct systems.
Driven by widespread adoption despite the heavy hardware over-
head of LLMs, there has been a surge in demand for dedicated pro-
cessors specifically designed for LLM inference, collectively known
as Language Processing Units (LPUs). For instance, Groq LPU [1, 2]
and Cerebras WSE [45, 48] pre-load model weights into on-chip
SRAM, while Etched Sohu [85] hardens the transformer dataflow
into its compute fabric. These LPUs leverage the advanced spe-
cialization targeting LLMs, achieving 4 ∼ 20× energy efficiency
compared to traditional CPUs, GPUs, and NPUs.
Although LPUs have brought a certain improvement in hardware
efficiency, AI infrastructure still suffers from tremendous energy
costs. For example, AI datacenters are estimated to occupy 12% of
the total electricity capacity in the US by 2028, which is clearly
unsustainable [58]. This is due to the fact that current LPUs and
GPUs still see models as dynamically changing data, despite the
fact that leading enterprises typically deploy only a single or a few
arXiv:2508.16151v2
[cs.AR]
13
Jan
2026
2 • Liu et al.
proprietary LLMs. The hundreds of billions of weight parameters
are repeatedly fetched during each autoregressive decoding step,
consuming the majority of system power.
To fundamentally solve the limitation, we argue for pushing the
specialization of LPU to the extreme. By physically hardwiring
weight parameters into the LPU fabric, Hardwired LPU can achieve
perfect architecture-model matching, zero parameter fetching over-
head, and extreme computational efficiency from constants-arithmetic
circuits. As one dominant pre-trained LLM can serve as a general-
purpose cognitive substrate for a wide variety of tasks, the extreme
specialization once considered too inflexible is transforming into a
reasonable choice with huge potential benefits (Figure 1).
However, previous attempts on hardwiring would be stopped
by the extraordinarily large scale of modern LLM. The most opti-
mistic estimation on hardwiring gpt-oss 120 B [61] would require a
176,000 mm2 constant-multiply-and-accumulate units (CMAC) ar-
ray at 5 nm technology. Unlike previous wafer-scale practices that
step a repeated lithographic pattern on the wafer, here the patterns
are heterogeneous everywhere, because embedded weight param-
eters are different everywhere. The photomask sets are valued at
over 6 billion dollars, rendering the straightforward implementation
of Hardwired LPU economically prohibitive.
An economically viable Hardwired LPU requires a breakthrough
in weight-embedding methodology. In this paper, we propose the
Metal-Embedding (ME) methodology, achieving multiple orders-of-
magnitude reduction on photomask counts required to implement
Hardwired LPU. Roughly speaking, instead of embedding weights
in the 2D grid of cells (either MAC/CMAC/SRAM/ReRAM cells),
ME embeds weights in the 3D topology of metal wires (Figure 6).
The benefits of ME are two-fold. First, due to the inherently richer
expression of 3D structure, ME reduced the area by an order-of-
magnitude (-93.4%) compared with the CMAC grid. Second, these
metal wires can be placed at higher metal layers (M8+), to be cost-
efficiently fabricated with trailing-edge optical lithography (193i).
As a result, ME keeps photomask homogeneous (shared) across all
chips for all layers in Front-End-of-Line (FEOL) and critical layers in
Back-End-of-Line (BEOL), including all Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV)
photomask in the process. This reduced the total cost on photomask
by another order of magnitude: -86.5% for initial tapeout, -92.3% for
parameter-only update re-spin.
We evaluate the first Hardwired LPU design HNLPU at 5 nm
technology based on post-layout characteristics, and compare with
baselines (NVIDIA H100 GPU, Cerebras WSE-3) at the same technol-
ogy node. Experimental results demonstrate that HNLPU achieved
249,960 tokens/s throughput (5,555× of H100, 85× of WSE-3), 36
tokens/J energy efficiency (1,047× of H100, 283× of WSE-3), at
13,232 mm2 total die area divided into 16 chips. Estimated Non-
Recurring Engineering cost (NRE) of HNLPU is $ 59.46 M–123.5 M
for the initial tapeout, $ 18.53 M–37.06 M for a parameter-only up-
date re-spin. Under the OpenAI-scale deployment, the 3-Year Total
Cost of Ownership (TCO) is lowered by 41.7–80.4× compared to
H100 clusters with annual parameter updates under the OpenAI-
scale volume, and the total carbon footprint (tCO2e) is lowered by
357×.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We explored the concept and feasibility of Hardwired LPU
for the first time.
• We propose the Metal-Embedding methodology, reduced
the photomask cost of Hardwired LPU by two orders of
magnitude.
• We detailed the architecture and dataflow of the first Hard-
wired LPU design, HNLPU. It implemented a gpt-oss 120 B
(FP4) in 13,232 mm2 total die area, achieving unprecedented
throughput and energy efficiency.
• We estimated the NRE, TCO, and tCO2e of HNLPU to show
its strong economical and environmental advantage for typ-
ical cloud serving scenarios.
2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Hardwired Language Processing Units
In principle, orders-of-magnitude gains in computational efficiency
can be achieved by directly fabricating neural network models
into hardware. Since the 1980s, hardwired neural networks have
been implemented in VLSI [29], optical [3, 86], and printed flexi-
ble [10, 55, 62, 63, 84] circuits. However, the diversity and rapid evo-
lution of neural networks have rendered such hardwired implemen-
tations of limited practical value and prone to rapid obsolescence.
As a result, instead of hardwired neural networks, general-purpose
processors such as GPUs and NPUs have prevailed due to their pro-
grammability. Contemporary AI infrastructure and software stacks
including programming languages (e.g., CUDA, Triton), libraries
(e.g., cuDNN, flash-attn), frameworks (e.g., PyTorch, vLLM) are built
on a sweet spot between computational efficiency and architectural
generality.
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has fundamentally al-
tered this landscape. Unlike earlier task-specific neural networks
designed for isolated tasks, LLMs function as general-purpose cog-
nitive substrates capable of reasoning, planning, and interacting
across a wide range of domains. For the first time in history,
we possess a single neural network model that is valuable
enough to justify hardwired implementation.
Although technically hardwired (in the sense that its parame-
ter weights are physically immutable), the circuit embodies a new
paradigm of the general-purpose processor. We refer to this novel
processor paradigm as the Hardwired Language Processing Unit
(Hardwired LPU). By leveraging the emergent capabilities of in-
context learning and zero-shot reasoning, a hardwired LPU treats
natural language prompts as a high-level instruction stream, effec-
tively replacing the traditional binary Instruction Set Architecture
(ISA) with a semantic interface. Consequently, the user programs
the Hardwired LPU not by altering its models and weights, but by
prompting with tokens to perform arbitrary tasks.
In this paper, we demonstrate that a single-node Hardwired LPU
can outperform a middle-sized GPU cluster without requiring ex-
pensive software support, thus establishing a decisive operational-
expenditure (OpEx) advantage over challengers. Therefore, we en-
vision Hardwired LPUs as game-changing platforms for long-term,
high-volume deployment, while GPU clusters assume the role of
short-cycle model development and evaluation testbeds.
