Tilus: A Tile-Level GPGPU Programming Language for
Low-Precision Computation
Yaoyao Ding∗†
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
yaoyao@cs.toronto.edu
Bohan Hou
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
bohanhou@andrew.cmu.edu
Xiao Zhang∗†
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
bohanhou@andrew.cmu.edu
Allan Lin
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
a8lin@uwaterloo.ca
Tianqi Chen∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
tqchen@cmu.edu
Cody Hao Yu
Independent Researcher
Santa Clara, CA, USA
hao.yu.cody@gmail.com
Yida Wang
Amazon Web Services
Santa Clara, CA, USA
wangyida@amazon.com
Gennady Pekhimenko∗†
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
pekhimenko@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Serving Large Language Models (LLMs) is critical for AI-
powered applications, yet it demands substantial compu-
tational resources, particularly in memory bandwidth and
computational throughput. Low-precision computation has
emerged as a key technique to improve efficiency while
reducing resource consumption. Existing approaches for
generating low-precision kernels are limited to weight bit
widths that are powers of two and suffer from suboptimal
performance because of high-level GPU programming ab-
stractions. These abstractions restrict critical optimizations,
such as fine-grained register management and optimized
memory access patterns, that are essential for efficient low-
precision computations. In this paper, we introduce Tilus,
a domain-specific language designed for General-Purpose
GPU (GPGPU) computing that supports low-precision data
types with arbitrary bit widths from 1 to 8 while maintaining
GPU programmability. Tilus features a thread-block-level
programming model, a hierarchical memory space, a novel
algebraic layout system, and extensive support for diverse
low-precision data types. Tilus programs are compiled into
∗Also with NVIDIA.
†Also with Vector Institute.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
xxx, xxx
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
highly efficient GPU programs through automatic vectoriza-
tion and instruction selection. Extensive experiments demon-
strate that Tilus efficiently supports a full spectrum of low-
precision data types, and outperforms state-of-the-art low-
precision kernels. Compared to existing compilers such as
Triton and Ladder, as well as hand-optimized kernels such
as QuantLLM and Marlin, Tilus achieves performance im-
provements of: 1.75×, 2.61×, 1.29× and 1.03×, respectively.
We open-source Tilus at https://github.com/NVIDIA/tilus.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Parallel
programming languages; Machine learning.
Keywords: GPU; programming language; parallel computa-
tion; low-precision computation; quantization
ACM Reference Format:
Yaoyao Ding, Bohan Hou, Xiao Zhang, Allan Lin, Tianqi Chen,
Cody Hao Yu, Yida Wang, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2026. Tilus:
A Tile-Level GPGPU Programming Language for Low-Precision
Computation . In xxx. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
revolutionized natural language processing tasks, enabling
advanced capabilities in areas such as text generation [9],
summarization [31], translation [59], and conversational
AI [43]. However, serving LLMs poses substantial compu-
tational challenges due to the large model sizes and high
computational demands. Efficient LLM serving demands in-
novative computational strategies to manage latency and
power consumption constraints. As such, optimizing LLM in-
ference has become a priority in both industry and research
to reduce latency and increase throughput of LLM serving.
arXiv:2504.12984v3
[cs.LG]
31
Aug
2025
xxx, xxx, xxx Yaoyao Ding et al.
Quantization [8, 11, 20, 30, 32, 54] has emerged as a lead-
ing method for enhancing the efficiency of LLM serving.
By reducing the bit-width of model parameters and acti-
vations, quantization reduces weight storage, DRAM band-
width usage, and achieves faster computation. For instance,
A16W4 quantization (16-bit activation and 4-bit weight) re-
duces DRAM consumption and throughput by 4× compared
to the A16W16 scheme, thereby reducing the time to gen-
erate a token by about 4× [21]. However, the state-of-the-
art 4-bit quantization methods [8, 11, 32] still suffer from
non-negligible accuracy degradation. While using 5- to 7-bit
quantization can mitigate this accuracy loss [3, 60], the lack
of efficient GPU kernels for these bit widths has hindered
their adoption. Generating optimized kernels for hardware-
unfriendly bit widths (e.g., 3, 5, 6, and 7) remains an open
problem.
Existing methods for generating computation kernels fall
into two main categories: manually written kernels [21, 60]
and compiler-generated kernels [12, 53, 58]. While manu-
ally written kernels are highly optimized for specific hard-
ware, they are time-consuming and error-prone to develop,
and difficult to generalize to new architectures and evolving
quantization methods. For example, QuantLLM [60] only
supports floating-point quantization for 5- and 6-bit data
types but lacks support for sub-channel quantization granu-
larity. Similarly, Marlin [21] is limited to 4-bit signed integer
quantization and does not support Hopper GPUs [33].
To address these limitations, compiler-based approaches
[12, 53, 58] have been proposed to automate kernel gener-
ation. Among them, Triton [53] simplifies the GPGPU pro-
gramming through a tile-based model. A Triton program
defines the computation of a thread block for tensor tiles.
However, Triton lacks built-in support for low-precision
data types, and thus requires users to implement low-level
bitwise operations manually. Additionally, it does not ex-
pose the full GPU memory hierarchy, limiting optimization
opportunities for low-precision LLM inference. Ladder [58],
on the other hand, extends TVM’s scheduling system [12]
to support low-precision computation but is restricted to
data types with bit widths that are powers of two. Moreover,
its primitives cannot express crucial optimizations such as
software pipelining [26], leading to suboptimal performance,
particularly for batch sizes greater than one during LLM
decoding with continuous batching [63] enabled.
In response to these challenges, we propose Tilus, a tile-
level GPGPU programming language backed by a virtual
machine with dedicated support for low-precision compu-
tation. Tilus abstracts GPU program execution into thread-
block-level instructions, simplifying GPGPU programming
while exposing hierarchical memory spaces for fine-grained
manipulation of sub-tensors in on-chip memory. This dual
approach enables efficient handling of arbitrary-precision
data types while reducing the complexity of GPU program-
ming. To achieve these goals, Tilus introduces: (1) an alge-
braic layout system that specifies how tensor elements
within a tile are distributed across GPU threads. This layout
system provides a unified way to represent the storage of
tile elements among different threads, making it possible to
expose the registers to the kernel developers and simplify
the code generation during compilation. (2) a thread-block-
level programming model with fine-grained memory
management, providing explicit control over data move-
ment, placement, and computation across different levels of
the GPU memory hierarchy; and comprehensive support for
(3) arbitrary low-precision data types including signed
integers, unsigned integers, and floating-point numbers with
bit widths ranging from 1 to 8.
Extensive experiments show that Tilus extends the spec-
trum of efficient low-precision kernels to support arbitrary
bit widths (from 1 to 8) and data type kinds (e.g., integer and
floating-point numbers). At the same time, Tilus outperforms
the state-of-the-art compilers, such as Triton [53] and Lad-
der [58], as well as hand-crafted kernels from QuantLLM [60]
and Marlin [21], achieving performance improvements of:
1.75×, 2.61×, 1.29× and 1.03×, respectively.
We summarize our key contributions as follows:
• We propose a GPGPU programming language Tilus
with dedicated support for low-precision computation,
addressing the critical bit-width coverage and perfor-
mance gap in existing approaches.
• Within Tilus, we introduce a novel layout system, a
thread-block-level programming model with hierar-
chical memory space, and support low-precision data
types with arbitrary bit-width from 1 to 8.
• Through extensive evaluation, we demonstrate that
Tilus generates a full spectrum of highly efficient low-
precision kernels, achieving up to 2.6× performance
improvement over state-of-the-art approaches on their
supported kernels.
2 Background
2.1 LLM Serving and Quantization
LLM serving consists of two inference stages: prefill and
decode. The prefill stage processes the input prompt to es-
tablish context, while the decode stage iteratively generates
output tokens based on prior tokens. Key LLM layers include
multi-head attention, feed-forward networks, and layer nor-
malization [56]. Among these, matrix multiplications domi-
nate computation time and memory consumption, making
their optimization crucial for efficient LLM serving. Quanti-
zation [13, 20] improves their efficiency by reducing model
weights and activations to lower-precision formats, such as
8-bit or 4-bit integers. It reduces memory usage, bandwidth
requirements, and inference latency while aiming to preserve
model accuracy. While 4-bit quantization provides significant
