Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite: Our most cost-effective AI model yet
Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite: Built for intelligence at scale
Mar 03, 2026
|
x.com
Facebook
LinkedIn
Mail
Copy link
Get best-in-class intelligence for your highest-volume workloads.
Equipe do Google Gemini
Share
x.com
Facebook
LinkedIn
Mail
Copy link
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Listen to article
[[duration]] minutes
This content is generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental
Voice
Speed
Voice
Speed
0.75X
1X
1.5X
2X
Read AI-generated summary
Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite is now available in preview to developers via the Gemini API in Google AI Studio and for enterprises via Vertex AI. Priced at $0.25/1M input tokens and $1.50/1M output tokens, it's cost-efficient and faster than 2.5 Flash. Use 3.1 Flash-Lite for tasks like translation content moderation generating user interfaces and creating simulations.
Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.
Google made a new AI model called Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite. It's super fast and cheap to use, so more people can use it. This AI is good at things like translating languages and checking content. Some companies are already using it to solve tough problems because it's both smart and efficient.
Summaries were generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental.
Explore other styles:
General summary
Basic explainer
Today, we're introducing Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite, our fastest and most cost-efficient Gemini 3 series model. Built for high-volume developer workloads at scale, 3.1 Flash-Lite delivers high quality for its price and model tier.
Starting today, 3.1 Flash-Lite is rolling out in preview to developers via the Gemini API in
Google AI Studio
and for enterprises via
Vertex AI
.
Cost-efficiency without compromise
Priced at just $0.25/1M input tokens and $1.50/1M output tokens, 3.1 Flash-Lite delivers enhanced performance at a fraction of the cost of larger models. It outperforms 2.5 Flash with a 2.5X faster Time to First Answer Token and 45% increase in output speed, according to the
Artificial Analysis benchmark
while maintaining similar or better quality. This low latency is needed for high-frequency workflows, making it an ideal model for developers to build responsive, real-time experiences.
Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite outperforms 2.5 Flash in speed and quality.
3.1 Flash-Lite achieves an impressive Elo score of 1432 on the
Arena.ai Leaderboard
and outperforms other models of similar tier across reasoning and multimodal understanding benchmarks, including 86.9% on GPQA Diamond and 76.8% on MMMU Pro–even surpassing larger Gemini models from prior generations like 2.5 Flash.
Adaptive intelligence at scale for developers
Beyond its raw performance, Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite comes standard with thinking levels in AI Studio and Vertex AI, giving developers the control and flexibility to select how much the model “thinks” for a task, which is critical for managing high-frequency workloads. 3.1 Flash-Lite can tackle tasks at scale, like high-volume translation and content moderation, where cost is a priority. And it can also handle more complex workloads where more in-depth reasoning is needed, like generating user interfaces and dashboards, creating simulations or following instructions.
3.1 Flash-Lite
instantly fills an e-commerce wireframe with hundreds
of products in different categories.
3.1 Flash-Lite can
generate dynamic weather dashboards in real-time
, using live forecasts and historical data.
3.1 Flash-Lite creates a SaaS agent capable of
executing versatile, multi-step tasks for a business
.
3.1 Flash-Lite can analyze and sort large numbers of content like images quickly.
Early-access developers on AI Studio and Vertex AI, and companies like Latitude, Cartwheel and Whering are already using 3.1 Flash-Lite to solve complex problems at scale. Early testers highlighted 3.1 Flash-Lite’s efficiency and reasoning capabilities, saying it can handle complex inputs with the precision of a larger-tier model, plus follow instructions and maintain adherence.
We look forward to seeing what you build with 3.1 Flash-Lite and the rest of the Gemini 3 series models.
Get the latest news from Google in your inbox
Sign up for our newsletters with product updates, event information, special offers, and more.
Done. Just one step more.
Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.
You can also subscribe with a
different email address
.
Your information will be used in accordance with
Google's privacy policy.
You may opt out at any time.
Posted in:
Related stories
Safety & Security
Proactive cyber defense for governments and enterprises
By
          
            
            Four Flynn
Gemini models
Introducing Gemini 3.8 Flash and 3.8 Flash Cyber
By
          
            
            Tulsee Doshi
          
            & 
            Raluca Ada Popa
AI
The latest AI news we announced in August 2026
By
          
            
            News from Google Team
Gemini models
Introducing agentic video understanding with Gemini
By
          
            
            Rohan Doshi
          
            & 
            Mario Lučić
Google Workspace
Try Google Pics: Easy image creation and editing in Google Workspace
By
          
            
            Meg Whittenberger
Search
3 new ways to plan and book travel in Search
By
          
            
            James Byers